HTL LEONDING - HOEHERE TECHNISCHE BUNDESLEHRANSTALT, Development of an MCP Server with Semantic Search for LeoWiki
DIPLOMA THESIS, submitted for the Reife- und Diplompruefung at the Department of Informatik
Submitted by: Jan Ritt, Imre Obermueller
Supervisor: Rainer Stropek, Project Partner: HTL Leonding (LeoWiki)


I hereby declare that I have composed the presented paper independently and on my own, without any other resources than the ones indicated. All thoughts taken directly or indirectly from external sources are properly denoted as such. This paper has neither been previously submitted to another authority nor has it been published yet. The presented paper is identical to the electronically transmitted document.
Leonding, April 2026,  Unterschriften: Jan Ritt & Imre Obermüller


Abstracts
English
This diploma thesis presents the development of a Model Context Protocol (MCP) server that enables semantic search functionality for LeoWiki, the internal wiki system of HTL Leonding. The project addresses the limitations of traditional keyword-based search by implementing a vector database with German-optimized text embeddings, allowing users to find relevant content through natural language queries via AI assistants (Claude, ChatGPT, Mistral Le Chat). The work is divided into two individual contributions: Imre Obermüller focuses on the MCP server implementation, including transport protocols (stdio, HTTP Streamable) and tool development. Jan Ritt concentrates on the embedding pipeline, retrieval optimization for German content, OAuth 2.1 authentication integration, and deployment via Docker Compose on the Raspberry Pi. The resulting system comprises an MCP server compatible with popular AI clients (Claude, ChatGPT, Mistral Le Chat), a benchmarked embedding system that raises the Mean Reciprocal Rank from 0.051 (DokuWiki keyword search with natural-language queries) to 0.872 (semantic search)—a 17-fold improvement—and a secure role-based access control layer integrated with Scalekit. The best-performing local model (Octen-Embedding-4B, MRR 0.883) could not be deployed on the target hardware (Raspberry Pi 5); the production system therefore uses the API-based OpenAI text-embedding-3-large (MRR 0.872).
Keywords: MCP, Model Context Protocol, Semantic Search, Vector Database, Text Embeddings, RAG, DokuWiki, LeoWiki, OAuth 2.1, RBAC
Deutsch
Diese Diplomarbeit beschreibt die Entwicklung eines Model Context Protocol (MCP) Servers, der semantische Suchfunktionalität für LeoWiki, das interne Wiki-System der HTL Leonding, ermöglicht. Das Projekt adressiert die Einschränkungen der traditionellen Stichwortsuche durch die Implementierung einer Vektordatenbank mit für Deutsch optimierten Text-Embeddings, wodurch Benutzer relevante Inhalte durch natürlichsprachige Anfragen über gängige KI-Assistenten (Claude, ChatGPT, Mistral Le Chat) finden können. Die Arbeit gliedert sich in zwei individuelle Beiträge: Imre Obermüller konzentriert sich auf die MCP-Server-Implementierung, einschließlich Transportprotokolle (stdio, HTTP Streamable) und Tool-Entwicklung. Jan Ritt fokussiert auf die Embedding-Pipeline, Retrieval-Optimierung für deutsche Inhalte, OAuth 2.1-Authentifizierungsintegration und Deployment via Docker Compose auf dem Raspberry Pi. Der entwickelte MCP-Server ist mit populären KI-Clients (Claude, ChatGPT, Mistral Le Chat) kompatibel und umfasst ein evaluiertes Embedding-System, das den Mean Reciprocal Rank von 0,051 (DokuWiki-Stichwortsuche mit natürlichsprachigen Anfragen) auf 0,872 (semantische Suche) steigert—eine 17-fache Verbesserung—sowie ein sicheres rollenbasiertes Zugriffskontrollsystem integriert mit Scalekit. Das leistungsstärkste lokale Modell (Octen-Embedding-4B, MRR 0,883) konnte auf der Zielhardware (Raspberry Pi 5) nicht betrieben werden; das Produktivsystem nutzt daher das API-basierte OpenAItext-embedding-3-large (MRR 0,872).
Schlagwörter: MCP, Model Context Protocol, Semantische Suche, Vektordatenbank, Text-Embeddings, RAG, DokuWiki, LeoWiki, OAuth 2.1, RBAC


Contents
Abstracts
1 Introduction
1.1 Problem Statement  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
1.2 Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
1.3 Scope and Limitations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
1.4 Methodology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
1.5 Structure of this Thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
2 Theoretical Foundations
2.1 Text Embeddings  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
2.2 Model Context Protocol  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
2.3 Authentication and Authorization  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3 Requirements Analysis
3.1 LeoWiki Content Analysis  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.2 User Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.3 Existing Search Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
3.4 Security Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
3.5 Functional Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
3.6 Non-Functional Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
4 System Architecture
4.1 System Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4.2 Component Architecture  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
4.3 Technology Decisions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
4.4 Interface Design  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
4.5 Deployment Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
5 MCP Server Implementation
5.1 SDK Evolution and Migration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
5.2 Server Initialization and Configuration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
5.3 Transport Protocols . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
5.4 OAuth 2.1 Authentication  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
5.5 FastMCP 3.0 Middleware Chain  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
5.6 Two-Tool RBAC Search Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
5.7 MCP Resources and Prompts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
5.8 Query Logging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
5.9 Error Handling and Security . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
5.10 Compatibility Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
5.11 MCP Server Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 76
6 Embedding, Retrieval, Authentication and Deployment
6.1 Embedding Model Evaluation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79
6.2 Chunking Strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 88
6.3 Qdrant Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 94
6.4 Retrieval Optimization  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 97
6.5 Search Quality Evaluation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100
6.6 Authentication with Scalekit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104
6.7 Deployment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109
6.8 Embedding and Retrieval Testing  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 113
7 Results and Conclusion
7.1 Achieved Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 117
7.2 Limitations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 120
7.3 Lessons Learned  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 122
7.4 Future Work  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 123
7.5 Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 124

Glossary VII
Bibliography X
List of Figures XV
List of Tables XIX
List of Listings XXII
Appendix XXIV
.1 ABA Proposal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XXIV
.2 Project Plan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XXV
.3 API Documentation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XXVI
.4 Configuration Reference. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XXXI
.5 Test Protocols . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XXXIII
.6 Benchmark Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XXXVII
.7 AI-Generated Content Disclosure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XLI


1 Introduction
1.1 Problem Statement

HTL Leonding, a secondary technical college in Upper Austria, operates LeoWiki as its
central knowledge management platform. Built on DokuWiki – a file-based wiki system
without a relational database [1] – the platform covers curricula, examination regulations,
administrative procedures, and organizational information (see Section 3.1 for corpus
details). The wiki serves three stakeholder groups with distinct information needs:
students seeking examination schedules and learning resources, teachers maintaining
curricula and internal documentation, and administrators managing the system.
Despite this knowledge base, the built-in DokuWiki search relies exclusively on key-
word matching via an inverted index without semantic interpretation [2]; Section 3.3
documents the mechanism in detail. When a student asks “When is the next exam in
mathematics?”, the search engine does not recognize the semantic equivalence between
“exam” (Schularbeit) and “test date” (Prüfungsdatum). Furthermore, DokuWiki’s AND
logic in conjunction with its stopword filter renders natural-language queries – the
expected search behavior for users without knowledge of DokuWiki’s namespace syntax
– largely ineffective.
A systematic evaluation on 78 question-answer pairs (Section 3.3) confirms this limi-
tation: even with manually optimized keywords, the default search achieves a Mean
Reciprocal Rank (MRR) of only 0.365, while natural-language questions yield an MRR
of 0.051.
This gap motivates the central research objective: developing a semantic search system
that bridges the vocabulary mismatch between natural-language queries and wiki
content.

1.2 Objectives Jan Ritt, Imre Obermüller

The goal of this diploma thesis is the development of a Model Context Protocol (MCP)
server that provides semantic search functionality for LeoWiki. By integrating the
server into AI assistants such as Claude, ChatGPT, and Mistral Le Chat, users can find
relevant wiki content through natural-language dialogue rather than keyword-based
search.
Three research questions guide the work:
FF1 – Search Quality. How effectively can a semantic search based on sentence
embeddings replace keyword-based search in an educational wiki (LeoWiki)?
Evidence: Quantitative comparison on a defined test question catalog. Primary metric:
MRR. Secondary metric: Precision@10. The search-quality evaluation is documented
in Section 6.5.
FF2 – MCP as Integration Standard.How suitable is the Model Context Protocol
(MCP) [3] as an interface between a specialized search server and heterogeneous AI
applications?
Evidence: Compatibility matrix of popular AI clients, practical interoperability tests
with at least three clients, and a qualitative assessment of the specification’s maturity.
Client tests and limitations are summarized in Section 5.10.
FF3 – Embedding Model Selection for German.Which sentence embedding model
achieves the best retrieval quality for German-language educational content on resource-
limited hardware?
Evidence: Comparison of five embedding models (four local, one API-based) on a test
corpus of LeoWiki pages. Metrics: MRR, NDCG@10, P@5, Recall@10, and Hit Rate
(tabulated in Section 6.1 and Appendix .6).
Note on sub-question labels.Each research question is operationalized through chapter-
level sub-questions that appear in the respective individual chapters:

1.3 Scope and Limitations Jan Ritt, Imre Obermüller
Prefix Chapter Maps to
FF1–FF3 Chapters 1 & 7 (shared) Main research questions
I1–I5 Chapter 5 (Imre Obermüller) FF2, FF1
J1–J8 Chapter 6 (Jan Ritt) FF3, FF1
The prefixIdenotes sub-questions from the MCP server chapter;Jdenotes sub-questions
from the embedding and retrieval chapter. Each chapter section notes which FF question
a given sub-question addresses (e.g. “operationalized as I5” or “sub-question J2”).
1.3 Scope and Limitations
The scope covers the full lifecycle from data ingestion to production deployment: a
five-stage offline pipeline (Chapter 4), the MCP server implementation (tools, resources,
prompts, transport protocols, middleware), the retrieval system (vector database,
similarity search), the authentication and authorization layer (OAuth 2.1 via Scalekit,
RBAC), and the containerized deployment (Docker Compose on a Raspberry Pi).
The following topics are explicitlynot in scope:
• The SYP projects Leonidas and Leonie – separate school-year projects that are
organizationally distinct from this diploma thesis.
• Continuous deployment to the Raspberry Pi – not required by the ABA and
intentionally deferred in favor of deeper evaluation work. A continuous integration
pipeline for automated testing is described in Section 5.11.
• Corpus-wide parametric significance testing (e.g., ANOVA across all five models
simultaneously) – pairwise non-parametric tests (Wilcoxon signed-rank) and
bootstrap confidence intervals are reported for all direct comparisons in Chapter 6,
but a full multi-comparison correction framework is outside the scope of this
thesis.
• Real-timecontentsynchronization– thesystem operates onaperiodicallyrefreshed
offline index rather than live-updating embeddings.

1.4 Methodology Jan Ritt, Imre Obermüller
1.4 Methodology
The project follows aDesign Science Researchapproach [4], combining iterative
artifact development with empirical evaluation. The methodology comprises three
interleaved phases:
1. Requirements Engineering and Technology Selection.Stakeholder needs
were elicited through analysis of the existing wiki usage patterns. Technology
alternatives for embedding models, vector databases, identity providers, and
transport protocols were systematically evaluated using structured comparison
matrices (Chapter 3).
2. Iterative Implementation.The system was developed in milestones aligned
with the ABA schedule: MCP server with stdio transport (December 2025),
semantic search integration (January 2026), HTTP Streamable transport (Febru-
ary 2026), OAuth2 authentication (March 2026), and Docker Compose deployment
(March 2026; npm as an alternative channel was evaluated per ABA but not
adopted, Section 6.7.4). Each milestone produced a testable artifact.
3. Evaluation-First Approach. A ground-truth dataset of 78 question-answer
pairs was constructed early (generated via Claude Opus 4.6, Anthropic, accessed
2026-02-17; manually verified by both authors against the wiki content for source
page existence, answer derivability, and question clarity; see Section 6.8.4 for
the verification procedure) and reused across all evaluations: embedding model
comparison (FF3), chunk size optimization, hybrid vs. dense retrieval, and the
keyword baseline comparison (FF1). This shared test corpus ensures cross-
evaluation comparability and eliminates confounding variables from differing test
sets.
The work is divided into two individual contributions:Imre Obermüllerfocuses on the
MCP server implementation, including JSON-RPC 2.0 messaging, capability negotiation,
transport protocol evaluation, tool development, and client compatibility analysis
(Chapter 5).Jan Rittconcentrates on the embedding pipeline, retrieval optimization
for German content, the Qdrant vector database schema, OAuth2 authentication
integration with Scalekit, and Docker-based deployment (Chapter 6).

1.5 Structure of this Thesis Jan Ritt, Imre Obermüller
1.5 Structure of this Thesis
This thesis is structured as follows:
Part I: Shared Chapters
• Chapter 1presents the problem statement, objectives, scope, and methodology.
• Chapter 2covers text embeddings, German-language challenges for NLP, the
Model Context Protocol, and authentication/authorization foundations.
• Chapter 3analyzes the current LeoWiki search limitations, stakeholder require-
ments, security needs, and technology alternatives.
• Chapter 4describes the overall system architecture, component responsibilities,
interface design, and deployment topology.
Part II: Individual Contribution – Imre Obermüller
• Chapter 5details the MCP server implementation: JSON-RPC messaging, trans-
port protocols, tool development, resources, prompts, middleware, authentication,
and client compatibility analysis.
Part III: Individual Contribution – Jan Ritt
• Chapter 6covers the embedding model evaluation, chunking strategy, Qdrant
vector database implementation, retrieval optimization, search quality evaluation,
Scalekit authentication, deployment, and testing.
Part IV: Shared Chapter
• Chapter 7 summarizes the achieved results against each research question,
discusses limitations and lessons learned, outlines future work, and presents the
overall conclusion.

2 Theoretical Foundations
2.1 Text Embeddings
2.1.1 From Tokens to Sentences
The foundation of modern embedding methods is the Transformer architecture [5]. Its
central mechanism – self-attention – enables consideration of the entire input context
when processing each token. Unlike recurrent architectures (RNN, LSTM), all positions
of a sequence are processed in parallel, enabling faster training and better modeling
of long-range dependencies. Self-attention explains why contextualized embeddings
outperform the static vectors of earlier approaches.
Static Token Embeddings
The first generation of neural word representations – in particular Word2Vec [6] –
assigns each word in the vocabulary exactly one fixed vector. This vector is learned
from co-occurrence statistics of large text corpora and encodes semantic similarities:
words with similar meanings are positioned close together in vector space. The central
limitation of static embeddings is that polysemy cannot be captured. The word “bank”
receives the same vector regardless of whether it refers to a financial institution or a
park bench.
Contextualized Token Embeddings
BERT [7] addresses the polysemy problem by computing a context-dependent vector
for each token. Through the bidirectional Transformer encoder, each token receives
a vector reflecting the entire sentence context. Thus, “bank” in “I go to the bank” is
represented differently than in “The bank grants a loan.” However, BERT primarily
produces token-level embeddings – it generates a matrix of vectors (one vector per
token), not a single vector for the entire sentence.

2.1 Text Embeddings Jan Ritt, Imre Obermüller
Sentence Embeddings and the Bi-Encoder Paradigm
For retrieval tasks, a single vector representing an entire text passage (sentence, para-
graph, or chunk) is required. While BERT can produce a sentence vector via mean
pooling or the[CLS] token, this strategy has been shown to yield suboptimal results.
Reimers and Gurevych [8] demonstrated that BERT-based sentence similarity via cross-
encoding delivers high quality but is impractical for retrieval: finding the most similar
pair in a collection of 10,000 sentences requires approximately 50 million inference
computations – around 65 hours [8].
Sentence-BERT (SBERT) [8] introduces the bi-encoder paradigm: query and document
are independently processed through the same encoder, and the resulting sentence
vectors are compared via cosine similarity. Training uses Siamese networks with
contrastive learning, where the model learns to place semantically similar sentences
close together and dissimilar sentences far apart in vector space. For retrieval, all
document vectors can be pre-computed and indexed in a vector database. At query
time, the query is encoded once, and the nearest neighbors are found via approximate
nearest-neighbor search in milliseconds [9].
The development since SBERT has led to a series of high-performing models. OpenAI’s
text-embedding-3-large [10] represents the API-based variant with 3,072-dimensional
vectors. BGE-M3 [11] pursues a multi-granularity approach that unifies dense, sparse,
and ColBERT retrieval in a single model. These models are systematically compared
on the MTEB benchmark [12], enabling informed model selection.
Suitability for LeoWiki Retrieval
For the semantic search in the LeoWiki of HTL Leonding, sentence embeddings were
chosen because the task – given a natural-language query, find the most relevant wiki
sections – aligns with the bi-encoder retrieval paradigm. Token embeddings would be
unsuitable for two reasons:
1. Scalability: Cross-encoding (pairwise comparison) does not scale to hundreds of
wiki pages with thousands of chunks. Pre-computed sentence vectors, in contrast,
enable sub-second response times.
2. Semantic granularity: The search unit is a text passage (chunk), not an
individual word. Sentence embeddings capture the meaning of the entire passage,
while token embeddings encode only word-level semantics.

2.1 Text Embeddings Jan Ritt, Imre Obermüller
The concrete model selection (FF3) and chunk size optimization are empirically investi-
gated in Section 6.1 and Section 6.2.3, respectively.
Retrieval-Augmented Generation. Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG), intro-
duced by Lewis et al. [13], combines a language model with an external non-parametric
memory – a retrieval system – to ground responses in verifiable documents rather
than relying solely on knowledge stored in model parameters. The LeoWiki pipeline
implements the ingestion and retrieval phases; generation is handled by the AI client.
Figure 2.1 illustrates the progression from static token to sentence-level embeddings.
Figure 2.2 summarizes the three-phase RAG process.
Figure 2.1:From token to sentence embeddings: static (Word2Vec), contextualized
(BERT), and sentence-level (SBERT) paradigms. Sentence embeddings
enable bi-encoder retrieval at scale.
Table 2.1 summarizes the key differences among the three embedding paradigms.

2.1 Text Embeddings Jan Ritt, Imre Obermüller
Figure 2.2:RAG pipeline architecture [13]: ingestion (offline), retrieval (at query time),
and generation (handled by the AI client). The LeoWiki system covers
ingestion and retrieval; the client performs generation.
Table 2.1: Comparison of embedding paradigms: static, contextualized, and
sentence-level.
Property Static (Word2Vec) Contextualized
(BERT)
Sentence (SBERT)
Granularity Word Token (in context) Sentence / paragraph
Polysemy No Yes Yes
Retrieval-suitable Limited No (cross-encoder) Yes (bi-encoder)
Pre-computation Yes Token vectors only Yes (sentence vectors)
Search latency O(N ) O(N·seq_len) O(logN )with ANN[9]

2.1 Text Embeddings Jan Ritt, Imre Obermüller
2.1.2 Challenges for German Language Models
German morphology poses three challenges for embedding-based retrieval: compound
words, case inflection, and flexible word order.
Compound Words
German forms compound words by concatenating multiple word stems into a single word:
“Donaudampfschifffahrtsgesellschaft” (Danube steam shipping company), “Semester-
pruefungsvorbereitung” (semester exam preparation), or “Stundenplankoordinator”
(timetable coordinator). For embedding models based on subword tokenization (e.g.,
WordPiece, BPE), this leads to two problems:
1. Tokenization fragmentation:Long compounds are split into multiple subword
tokens that individually carry little meaning. A model trained primarily on
English corpora may segment “Semesterpruefung” into fragments that are no
longer semantically associated with “Semester” or “Pruefung” (exam).
2. Vocabulary coverage:The subword vocabulary of a primarily English-trained
model contains German compounds as whole tokens only if they appear frequently
enough in the training corpus. Domain-specific compounds from the school context
(e.g., “Kollegiumssitzung” – faculty meeting, “Maturaprüfungstermin” – diploma
exam date) are typically not covered.
Case Inflection and Morphology
German features four grammatical cases (nominative, genitive, dative, accusative), three
genders (masculine, feminine, neuter), and rich verb inflection. A single concept can
appear in various morphological forms: “des Lehrers” (of the teacher), “dem Lehrer”
(to the teacher), “den Lehrer” (the teacher, accusative). While contextualized models
such as BERT [7] can resolve these variants in context, this requires the model to have
seen sufficient German training data to learn the morphological patterns.
Word Order Flexibility
Unlike English (SVO order), German permits considerable flexibility in word order. In
particular, the verb-second position in main clauses, verb-final position in subordinate
clauses, and the bracket structure (“hat...gemacht” – has...done) cause semantically

2.1 Text Embeddings Jan Ritt, Imre Obermüller
related elements to be distributed across wide distances within a sentence. Self-attention-
based models [5] can in principle model such long-range dependencies but benefit from
language-specific training.
Multilingual vs. Monolingual Models
These properties motivate the model comparison in FF3. Two strategies are avail-
able:
Multilingual models. Models such as BGE-M3 [11] are trained on corpora in over
100 languages and can be deployed without language-specific adaptation. The advantage
lies in broad coverage; the disadvantage is that the model must distribute its capacity
across many languages – a trade-off termed the “Curse of Multilinguality” [14, 15].
For languages with a smaller share of the training corpus, this can lead to quality
degradation.
German-optimized models. Since 2024, the MTEB benchmark [12] includes a dedi-
cated German retrieval leaderboard (RTEB deu, beta) that evaluates retrieval quality
specifically for German texts. Models such as bflhc/Octen-Embedding-4B (4.0B
parameters, 2,560 dimensions) and telepix/PIXIE-Rune-v1.0 (568M parameters,
1,024 dimensions) achieve high scores on this leaderboard (accessed 2026-02-17) and
potentially offer better coverage of German morphology. The Sentence-Transformers
library (v3.3 in the evaluation stack) [16] provides the technical infrastructure for
training and inference.
Decompounding as a Preprocessing Strategy
A common approach to improving retrieval quality for German texts is decompounding
– the automatic decomposition of compounds into their constituents (“Stundenplankoor-
dinator”→ “Stunden,” “Plan,” “Koordinator”). This strategy is recommended in the
literature particularly for traditional search systems (BM25/TF-IDF), as it increases
the lexical overlap between query and document.
Decompounding was considered as a preprocessing strategy but not implemented. The
decision rests on two considerations:

2.2 Model Context Protocol Jan Ritt, Imre Obermüller
1. We assume that subword tokenization partially addresses compound splitting;
empirical verification is outside the scope of this thesis.
2. The additional implementation effort (decompounding dictionary, error handling
for proper nouns and technical terms) is disproportionate to the expected quality
gain for sentence-level retrieval.
Implications for Model Selection
Research question FF3 calls for a systematic comparison of five embedding models
on LeoWiki content. The evaluation (Section 6.1) compares both multilingual models
(BGE-M3, OpenAI text-embedding-3-large) and German-optimized models on a
test corpus of real wiki pages from HTL Leonding. Whether German-optimized models
outperform on domain-specific data is tested empirically in Chapter 6.
2.2 Model Context Protocol
2.2.1 Protocol Overview
The integration of external knowledge sources into AI applications requires a communi-
cation protocol that enables both structured data retrieval and dynamic tool interaction
between a language model and a data source. With the Model Context Protocol
(MCP) [3], Anthropic introduced a protocol standard in 2024 specifically designed for
this use case. Unlike classical API protocols, MCP follows a tool-based paradigm: the
server does not expose resources in the REST sense but declares capabilities that an AI
client can invoke. Communication is organized not around entities but around actions:
“search for X,” “read document Y,” “navigate to Z” [3].
MCP defines two transport mechanisms: stdio (standard input/output) for local
process-to-process communication andHTTP Streamablefor network-based scenarios.
Both transports use JSON-RPC 2.0 [17] as the message format. The stdio variant
enables direct integration into CLI-based AI clients without network overhead, while
HTTP Streamable ensures interoperability with web-based clients.
Without MCP, integratingN AI clients withM data sources requiresN×M custom
adapters—each combination needs its own connector code. MCP addresses this combi-
natorial problem by introducing a standardized protocol layer: each client implements
one MCP client, each data source implements one MCP server, reducing the total

2.2 Model Context Protocol Jan Ritt, Imre Obermüller
integration effort fromO(N·M) to O(N +M). Figure 2.3 illustrates this architectural
advantage.
Figure 2.3:The N×M integration problem (left) vs. the MCP hub-and-spoke model
(right). MCP eliminates custom adapter code by standardizing the commu-
nication protocol.
A distinguishing feature of MCP is the explicit session lifecycle model. Communication
begins with an initialization phase in which client and server negotiate their capabilities.
Thereafter, a persistent session is maintained within which multiple tool calls take place.
This model corresponds to the natural flow of an AI conversation, where a language
model interacts with the same data source across multiple turns. Figure 2.4 depicts the
MCP architecture and session flow.
2.2.2 Architectural Comparison: MCP vs REST vs GraphQL vs
OData
To understand the architectural positioning of MCP, it is compared below along eight
dimensions with the established integration protocols REST [18], GraphQL [19], and
OData [20].

2.2 Model Context Protocol Jan Ritt, Imre Obermüller
Figure 2.4:MCP architecture: client-server session with initialization, tool discovery,
and JSON-RPC 2.0 messaging over stdio or HTTP Streamable transport.

2.2 Model Context Protocol Jan Ritt, Imre Obermüller
Paradigm
REST follows the resource-oriented architectural style: each entity is identified by a
URI, and interaction occurs via standardized HTTP methods (GET, POST, PUT,
DELETE) [18]. GraphQL pursues a query-based approach where the client declaratively
specifies the desired data structure [19]. OData combines both approaches: resource-
oriented URLs with a standardized query language ($filter, $expand, $select) [20].
MCP, in contrast, is a protocol for tool provisioning where the server declares capabilities
that an AI client can invoke [3].
Schema and Typing
REST uses OpenAPI/Swagger for interface description, though its use is optional.
GraphQL enforces a strongly typed schema (SDL – Schema Definition Language) that
simultaneously serves as documentation and validation basis [19]. OData defines its
schema via the Common Schema Definition Language (CSDL) [20]. MCP types its
tools via JSON Schema [3]: each tool declares its input parameters as a JSON Schema
object. The crucial difference is that in MCP, the schema is not primarily intended
for developers but for the language model – it must be able to infer from the tool
description and schema when and how to call a tool.
Discovery
REST ideally relies on HATEOAS (Hypermedia as the Engine of Application State),
where links in responses point to related resources [18]. In practice, HATEOAS is
rarely fully implemented; instead, an OpenAPI specification serves as a static directory.
GraphQL offers introspection: the client can query the complete schema via a query [19].
OData provides a$metadata document [20]. MCP implements discovery as an integral
part of the protocol: thetools/list call returns all available tools with descriptions
and JSON schemas at runtime. This occurs automatically during the initialization phase
and can be dynamically updated via thetools/list_changed notification [3].
Suitability for AI Tool Integration
This is the dimension in which MCP differs fundamentally from the three comparison
protocols. REST, GraphQL, and OData were designed for human-to-machine or

2.2 Model Context Protocol Jan Ritt, Imre Obermüller
machine-to-machine communication. An AI client that wants to use a REST API
requires:
• A manual tool definition (function calling schema)
• A wrapper that executes the API calls
• Error handling for each endpoint
• Context management across multiple calls
MCP abstracts this layer: the server declares its capabilities in a format that language
models can directly interpret. MCP reduces the manual integration effort through
natural-language tool descriptions, JSON Schema parameters, and a structured session
lifecycle [3]. Since its introduction, MCP has been adopted by AI clients including
Claude Desktop (developed by Anthropic, which also created MCP), as well as the
independent third-party products Cursor and VS Code Copilot [21].
Summary Comparison
Table 2.2 summarizes the comparison along all eight dimensions.
Table 2.2: Architectural comparison: MCP, REST, GraphQL, and OData along eight
dimensions.
Dimension REST GraphQL OData MCP
Paradigm Resource-
oriented
Query-based Resource + query Tool-/capability-
based
Transport HTTP HTTP (de facto) HTTP stdio, HTTP
Streamable
State Stateless Stateless Stateless Session lifecycle
Schema OpenAPI (opt.) SDL (mandatory) CSDL JSON Schema
(per tool)
Discovery HATEOAS/Ope-
nAPI
Introspection $metadata tools/list (dy-
namic)
Streaming SSE (add-on) Subscriptions Delta links SSE + progress
notif.
AI suitab. Low (wrapper
req.)
Medium Low Native
Batching Manual Nested req. $expand LLM-guided seq.
The comparison shows that MCP is not a competitor to REST, GraphQL, or OData
in classical API design but rather a complementary layer for AI-specific integration.
The design decisions – session lifecycle, natural-language tool descriptions, dynamic

2.3 Authentication and Authorization Jan Ritt, Imre Obermüller
discovery, and JSON-RPC 2.0 as the message format [17] – address specific requirements
of language model–tool interaction that are not covered by the established protocols. For
the present work, this comparison justifies the choice of MCP as the integration protocol
for the LeoWiki server: the task – a language model should issue natural-language
search queries to a wiki knowledge base – aligns with the tool-calling paradigm for
which MCP was designed.
2.3 Authentication and Authorization
2.3.1 OAuth2/OIDC for Server-Side Integration
The semantic search in LeoWiki must not make all content equally accessible to all
users. The DokuWiki of HTL Leonding uses a namespace-based permission model (ACL
– Access Control List) that governs access to pages and namespaces by user groups. An
integration of semantic search must respect this permission model: a student must not
be able to find exam questions intended only for teachers.
The OAuth 2.0 Framework
OAuth 2.0 [22] defines an authorization framework that enables a third-party appli-
cation (client) to access protected resources on behalf of a user without knowing the
user’s credentials. The framework specifies four roles: Resource Owner (user), Client
(application), Authorization Server (token issuer), and Resource Server (API). The
central mechanism is the issuance of access tokens, which are transmitted as Bearer
tokens [23] in HTTP requests.
Authorization Code Flow with PKCE
For server-side web applications – such as the MCP server with HTTP Streamable
transport – the Authorization Code Flow is the recommended grant type [22]. The flow
comprises the following steps:
1. The client redirects the user to the Authorization Server.
2. The user authenticates and grants authorization.
3. The Authorization Server sends an authorization code to the client (via redirect
URI).

2.3 Authentication and Authorization Jan Ritt, Imre Obermüller
4. The client exchanges the code for an access token (and optionally a refresh token).
OAuth 2.1 [24] (draft-ietf-oauth-v2-1-12, October 2025; still under revision) man-
dates PKCE (Proof Key for Code Exchange) for all clients – not only for public clients.
PKCE protects against authorization code interception attacks by having the client
generate a cryptographic code verifier, whose hash (code challenge) is sent with the
authorization request. During token exchange, the client must present the original
verifier, which only it knows.
OpenID Connect as Identity Layer
OAuth 2.0 is an authorization, not an authentication protocol – it defines what a client
may do, not who the user is. OpenID Connect (OIDC) [25] extends OAuth 2.0 with an
identity layer:
• ID Token: A JWT (JSON Web Token) containing user attributes (claims):
subject (sub), name, email, group memberships.
• UserInfo Endpoint: A standardized endpoint providing additional user infor-
mation.
• Standardized Scopes: openid (mandatory), profile, email, groups.
For the wiki integration, OIDC is essential because the authorization decision (which
namespaces may the user access?) is based on the user’s identity and group membership.
The ID token provides this information in machine-readable form.
2.3.2 RBAC to Namespace Mapping
The RBAC Model
Role-Based Access Control [26] defines an authorization model in which permissions
are assigned not directly to users but to roles. Users are assigned to roles and thereby
inherit the permissions associated with that role. The model comprises four core
components:
• Users: Persons accessing the system.
• Roles: Named collections of permissions (e.g., “student,” “teacher,” “administra-
tor”).
• Permissions: Allowed actions on objects (e.g., “read on namespace exam:”).

2.3 Authentication and Authorization Jan Ritt, Imre Obermüller
• Sessions: Activated roles of a user at runtime.
Mapping to DokuWiki Namespaces
The DokuWiki ACL system assigns permission levels (0=none, 1=read, 2=edit, ...,
255=admin) to user groups at the namespace level. This model maps directly to RBAC.
Table 2.3 shows the assignment.
Table 2.3: Mapping of RBAC roles to DokuWiki groups and namespace permissions.
RBAC Role DokuWiki Group Typical Namespace Permissions
Student @student Read on public namespaces (wiki:, info:)
Teacher @teacher Read/write on all pedagogical namespaces
Administrator @admin Full access on all namespaces incl. admin: and config:
For semantic search, this means: before returning search results, the MCP server
must verify the ACL permissions of the requesting user and return only chunks from
namespaces for which the user possesses at least read permission. The implementation
of this filter mechanism is described in Chapter 6, Section 6.6.
Architecture Summary
The authentication and authorization architecture for the LeoWiki integration is based
on three layers:
1. Authentication: OAuth 2.1 Authorization Code Flow with PKCE (via an
external authorization server).
2. Identity: OpenID Connect ID tokens with group claims (assignment to studen-
t/teacher/administrator).
3. Authorization: RBAC model mapping OIDC groups to DokuWiki namespace
ACLs.
This architecture is designed to enforce the existing permission model of LeoWiki and
reduce the risk of unauthorized cross-namespace access.

3 Requirements Analysis
3.1 LeoWiki Content Analysis
3.1.1 Content Volume and Structure
The LeoWiki of HTL Leonding is based on DokuWiki version 2024-02-06b “Kaos” [1]
(cf. Section 1.1). The limitations of the built-in search are analyzed in Section 3.3; here
only a summary is given: full-text indexing matches exact strings against an inverted
index without semantic interpretation [2].
As part of the offline pipeline, the entire data inventory of LeoWiki was captured
and preprocessed. The corpus comprises 196 pages across 23 namespaces as well as
320 media files. The pages cover organizational documents, examination information,
curricula, and internal administrative content.
3.1.2 Content Characteristics
The content of LeoWiki is predominantly German-language and encompasses both struc-
tured documents (tables, lists, regulations) and running text. The German language
frequently forms compound words (e.g., “Maturaarbeit” – diploma work, “Semester-
pruefung” – semester exam, “Lehrerkonferenz” – teacher conference), which pose a
particular challenge for the search function. DokuWiki-specific markup must be removed
or transformed during preprocessing before embeddings can be generated.
3.2 User Requirements
3.2.1 User Roles
Based on an analysis of DokuWiki ACL group configurations (fileconf/acl.auth.php,
five role groups in the production instance) and review of which namespaces are exposed
to students versus teachers, three primary stakeholder groups were identified for the
LeoWiki MCP system, whose needs determine the requirements:

3.2 User Requirements Jan Ritt, Imre Obermüller
Students The largest user group of LeoWiki. They require fast access to learning
materials, examination information, and organizational documents. Their search
queries are frequently formulated as natural-language questions (e.g., “When is
the next exam in mathematics?”). Access should be restricted exclusively to
student-relevant content.
Teachers Teachers use the wiki both as consumers (looking up regulations, curricula)
and as authors. They require access to extended content, including internal
documents and administrative information not visible to students.
Administrators Responsible for system maintenance and configuration. They require
access to system statistics, query metrics, and vector database management.
3.2.2 Access Patterns
The use cases were derived from the stakeholder requirements and documented system
interactions. The identified use cases are summarized in Table 3.1. Students primarily
access the wiki in read mode and formulate their queries as natural-language questions.
Teachers act both as consumers and authors and require extended access to internal
documents. Administrators monitor the system state and perform data updates as
needed.
Table 3.1: Identified use cases for the LeoWiki MCP system.
Use Case Actor Description
UC-1 Student Semantic search for wiki content via an AI client
UC-2 Teacher Extended search with access to internal documents
UC-3 Admin View system statistics and query metrics
UC-4 Admin Update the vector database via pipeline
UC-5 All Authentication via OAuth 2.1 / Scalekit
3.2.3 Search Requirements
From the stakeholder needs, the following requirements for the search function
emerge:
• Natural-language queries must be semantically interpreted rather than merely
performing exact keyword matching.

3.3 Existing Search Limitations Jan Ritt, Imre Obermüller
• Synonyms, paraphrases, and semantically related terms should be considered
during search.
• Search results must be weighted and sorted by relevance.
• German compound words must be handled correctly.
• Access to search results must be controlled on a role-based basis.
3.3 Existing Search Limitations
3.3.1 DokuWiki Default Search
The DokuWiki search operates at the token level: a document is recognized as a
hit only if the exact search terms appear in the text. The search engine is based
on an inverted index that maps words to the documents in which they appear. No
semantic interpretation of the query takes place [2]. The sorting of search results uses a
simple heuristic based on the frequency and position of hits within the document. A
learning-based relevance weighting, as offered by modern retrieval systems based on
text embeddings, is not available [8].
3.3.2 Identified Limitations
Four weaknesses of the existing DokuWiki search were identified:
1. Missing semantic interpretation.The semantic equivalences listed in Sec-
tion 3.2.3 are not recognized. For example, searching for “Schularbeit Termin”
(exam date) does not find pages that instead contain “Pruefungsdatum” (test
date) or “Klausurtermin” (examination date). This behavior is known in the
information retrieval literature as thevocabulary mismatch problem[2].
2. No handling of German compound words.The DokuWiki search does not
decompose compounds into their constituents. Searching for “Matura” finds pages
containing “Maturaarbeit” only if substring search is supported – the default
indexing yields unreliable results.
3. No query contextualization.Search queries in natural language (e.g., “How
does the registration for the diploma thesis work?”) are not interpreted as

3.4 Security Requirements Jan Ritt, Imre Obermüller
questions. Instead, individual words are searched independently in the index. The
order and context of terms are lost.
4. No learning-based relevance weighting.DokuWiki uses a simple heuristic for
sorting search results. A semantic relevance weighting based on text embeddings
is not available.
As part of the keyword baseline evaluation (cf. Chapter 6), the existing DokuWiki
search was systematically evaluated with a test corpus of 78 question-answer pairs. The
results quantitatively confirm the described weaknesses:
• MRR with full questions:0.051 – the correct wiki page appears on average
far beyond the first results when a natural-language question is used as the search
query.
• MRR with optimal keywords:0.365 – even with manually chosen optimal
search terms, the MRR is below the MRR 0.872 achieved by the dense retrieval
system (cf. Chapter 6).
• Precision@10 with full questions:0.010 – the relevant page is almost never
found among the first ten search results. Precision@10 is reported as the secondary
metric for FF1 (cf. Section 1.2); the embedding model evaluation in Chapter 6
additionally reports P@5.
The discrepancy between question-based search (MRR 0.051) and keyword-based search
(MRR 0.365) illustrates the core problem: users formulate queries as questions, but the
system expects exact keywords. The quantitative gaps above therefore motivate an
embedding-based search integrated via the Model Context Protocol [3], as evaluated in
Chapter 6.
3.4 Security Requirements
3.4.1 Authentication Requirements
Authentication is performed via OAuth 2.1 with an external identity provider [22].
Three identity provider candidates were compared (cf. Table 3.2):
After evaluating the three alternatives, the team selectedScalekit based on its focus
on SSO integration for educational institutions, low setup effort, and availability as
a managed service. Keycloak’s Java runtime imposes a significant memory overhead

3.4 Security Requirements Jan Ritt, Imre Obermüller
Table 3.2: Comparison of identity provider alternatives (as of February 2026).
Criterion Scalekit Auth0 Keycloak
Type Managed SaaS Managed SaaS Self-hosted
SSO for education Yes (core focus) Yes (enterprise) Yes (config-intensive)
Setup effort Low (SDK) Medium High (Java infrastruc-
ture)
ARM64 support n/a (cloud) n/a (cloud) Yes, but resource-
intensive
Cost Free tier sufficient Free tier limited Free (self-hosted)
(typically several hundred megabytes at idle [27]), exceeding the available memory
budget on the Raspberry Pi 5, so it was ruled out; Auth0’s enterprise-oriented pricing
model made it less suitable for a school project. Role assignment is performed via JWT
claims in the OAuth 2.1 flow [22, 25].
3.4.2 Authorization Requirements
Access to search results is controlled on a role-based basis [26]. Three roles are
defined:
Student Restricted access to student-relevant content.
Teacher Extended access to all content, including internal documents.
Admin Full access to all content and system administration functions.
For security reasons, two separate MCP tools are implemented:
search_content_student (student-relevant content) andsearch_content_teacher
(all content). This separation prevents RBAC circumvention through parameter
manipulation (Security by Design).
3.4.3 Data Protection Requirements
The security architecture comprises the following measures:
• TLS termination via Caddy with automatic certificate renewal through Let’s
Encrypt [28, 29].
• Qdrant bound to localhost only in the deployment stack (Section 4.5).
• Network separation:mcp-frontend (public) andmcp-backend (internal).
24
3.5 Functional Requirements Jan Ritt, Imre Obermüller
• Security headers (HSTS, X-Frame-Options, X-Content-Type-Options).
• The AuditLoggingMiddleware is designed to support GDPR-aligned data mini-
mization: user identifiers are SHA-256 hashed and no personal data is stored in
the embeddings. No formal GDPR audit has been performed.
3.5 Functional Requirements
3.5.1 MCP Integration
FR-1: Semantic search via MCP.The system must provide semantic search func-
tionality that can be integrated into AI clients (e.g., Claude Desktop, Cursor, VS Code)
via the Model Context Protocol [3]. The search should understand natural-language
queries and identify relevant wiki pages using text embeddings [8].
FR-2: Multi-client support. The system must be accessible via two transport proto-
cols: stdio for local clients (e.g., Claude Desktop) and HTTP Streamable for web-based
clients. Both transports follow the MCP specification [3].
Table 3.3 compares three integration protocol options.
Table 3.3: Comparison of integration protocol alternatives (as of February 2026).
Criterion MCP Custom REST
API
GraphQL
AI client integration Native (Claude, Cur-
sor, VS Code)
Manual per client Manual per client
Tool discovery Automatic Not available Schema-based
Capability negotiation Yes No No
Transport protocols stdio, HTTP Stream-
able
HTTP HTTP
Ecosystem maturity Growing (est. 2024) Mature Mature
MCP was chosen as integration protocol [3]. It provides standardized mechanisms for
tool discovery and capability negotiation that are absent in generic API protocols. A
custom REST API would require separate integration for each client. GraphQL offers
a schema but does not address the specific communication patterns required for AI tool
integration [19].
25
3.5 Functional Requirements Jan Ritt, Imre Obermüller
Limitations of MCP. MCP is a relatively recent standard: the specification underwent
three revisions within a year (2024-11-05, 2025-03-26, 2025-11-25), requiring repeated
server updates. Not all AI clients implement the full feature set (cf. Section 5.10).
Alternative approaches – such as OpenAI function calling with custom tool definitions,
or framework-bound solutions like LangChain Skills – were not selected because they
lack standardized tool discovery across multiple clients. MCP was chosen because it is
the only evaluated option with both standardized tool discovery and session lifecycle
management; its limitations are documented throughout Chapters 5 and 7.
3.5.2 Search Functionality
FR-3: Two separate search tools. Two separate MCP tools are implemented:
search_content_student (student-relevant content) andsearch_content_teacher
(all content), following the RBAC separation principle defined in Section 3.4.2.
FR-4: Offline pipeline for data preparation. The preparation of wiki content is
performed as an offline five-stage pipeline; the stages are defined in Chapter 4. The
pipeline operates independently of the runtime system and can be executed manually
or automatically as needed.
Four vector database candidates were evaluated (cf. Table 3.4):
Table 3.4: Comparison of vector database alternatives (as of February 2026).
Criterion Qdrant Milvus Pinecone ChromaDB
Language Rust Go + C++ Managed Python
Docker-native Yes Yes (complex) No (cloud) Yes (limited)
ARM64 support Yes Experimental n/a Yes
Hybrid search Yes, native Yes No No
RBAC Collections Partitions Yes No
License Apache 2.0 Apache 2.0 Proprietary Apache 2.0
Qdrant best matched the deployment constraints [30]. Qdrant provides native ARM64
Docker images, an integrated hybrid search implementation, and a collection-based
architecture that maps directly to the RBAC requirements of this project. These
concrete properties match the Raspberry Pi deployment constraints better than the
alternatives evaluated. Milvus requires additional infrastructure components (etcd,
MinIO) that exceed the Raspberry Pi’s resource budget. Pinecone was excluded as a
26
3.5 Functional Requirements Jan Ritt, Imre Obermüller
cloud-only solution, since the system is to be operated on-premises. ChromaDB does
not provide sufficient RBAC support.
Five embedding model candidates were compared for German-language wiki content;
Table 3.5 lists four of the five models; Octen-Embedding-4B is introduced in Chapter 6.
Language support is a relevant selection criterion [12].
Table 3.5: Comparison of embedding model alternatives (as of February 2026).
Criterion text-emb.-3-
large
bge-m3 Snowflake Arc-
tic
Octen-4B
Provider OpenAI (API) BAAI (local) Snowflake (local) Octen (local)
Dimensions 3072 1024 1024 2560
MTEB (deu) n/a 60.24 65.48 73.25
Cost $0.13/1M tok. Free Free Free
OpenAI text-embedding-3-large [10] is used as the primary embedding model for the
pipeline (cf. Section 4.2.2). The API stability and simple HTTP-based integration favor
the commercial solution; the costs are negligible for a corpus of 196 wiki pages ($0.14 for
the production run). As part of research question FF3, five models are systematically
compared (cf. Chapter 6), including four local models from the MTEB(deu) leaderboard
and OpenAI as a paid reference.
3.5.3 Administration
FR-5: System monitoring. Administrators should be able to view system
status and usage statistics via dedicated MCP tools ( get_collection_stats,
get_query_statistics, health_check).
Three reverse proxy options were compared (cf. Table 3.6):
Table 3.6: Comparison of reverse proxy alternatives (as of February 2026).
Criterion Caddy Nginx Traefik
Auto-TLS Yes, zero-config Yes, via Certbot Yes, native
Config effort Minimal Medium Medium
SSE support Yes ( flush_interval) Yes (manual) Yes
ARM64 Yes Yes Yes
The deployment constraints – automatic TLS, minimal configuration, and native SSE
support for HTTP Streamable transport – led toCaddy as the reverse proxy [28].
27
3.6 Non-Functional Requirements Jan Ritt, Imre Obermüller
3.6 Non-Functional Requirements
3.6.1 Performance
NFR-1: Response time. Semantic search queries must be answered within 2 seconds
(measured from receipt of the MCP request to return of results). This includes the
vector search in Qdrant as well as result formatting.
NFR-2: Availability. The runtime system (MCP server, Qdrant, Caddy) must be
operated as a Docker Compose stack that is automatically restored after a host system
restart (restart: unless-stopped ) [31].
3.6.2 Scalability
NFR-3: Reproducibility. All pipeline results must be tagged with a timestamp,
configuration hash, and code version (manifest.json) to ensure traceability of data
processing. The pipeline is designed so that it can be re-executed fully or incrementally
when wiki content changes.
3.6.3 Maintainability
NFR-4: Maintainability. System maintainability is ensured through the following
measures:
• Configuration via YAML files (config/env.yaml), secrets in separate.token
files.
• Docker-based deployment with clearly defined service boundaries.
• Watchdog service for automated data updates.
NFR-5: Data protection (GDPR). The data protection measures defined in Sec-
tion 3.4.3 apply, including GDPR-aligned audit logging (SHA-256 hashed identifiers)
and the exclusion of personal data from embeddings. No formal GDPR audit has been
performed.
28
4 System Architecture
4.1 System Overview
4.1.1 High-Level Architecture
The overall system consists of two architecturally separated areas: an offline pipeline
for data preparation and a runtime system for answering semantic search queries. This
separation is a deliberate design principle – the MCP server does not connect directly
to LeoWiki at runtime but accesses exclusively the prepared vector data in Qdrant.
Figure 4.1 provides an overview of both phases.
Figure 4.1:LeoWiki MCP system overview. The offline phase (left) prepares the
knowledgebaseonadevelopmentmachine: wikicontentisfetched, evaluated,
chunked, embedded, and indexed into Qdrant. The resulting vector database
is deployed to the Raspberry Pi 5 (right), where the runtime phase serves
semantic search queries via the MCP protocol to AI clients.
29
4.1 System Overview Jan Ritt, Imre Obermüller
The offline pipeline is executed on a development machine and transforms the LeoWiki
content into vectorized data. The runtime system, comprising four Docker services on a
Raspberry Pi, exposes this data via the Model Context Protocol (MCP) for AI clients.
This separates data preparation from production operation.
4.1.2 Data Flow
The data flow in the system can be divided into two phases: the preparation phase
(offline pipeline) and the query phase (runtime system).
Preparation Phase: Five-Stage Pipeline
Data preparation follows a sequential five-stage pipeline. The production-oriented runs
in this thesis used a wiki snapshot fetched on 2026-02-25, with RAG preprocessing on
2026-02-26 and embedding on 2026-02-26. The full evaluation corpus (10,841 chunks)
was produced from pipeline runs on 2026-02-17 using a snapshot fetched on 2026-02-
16.
1. Wiki Fetcher: Communicates with LeoWiki via the DokuWiki XML-RPC
API [32]. The fetcher wraps each XML-RPC call in a Python helper that returns
JSON-structured data for downstream pipeline stages. Page contents (DokuWiki
syntax), metadata (JSON), HTML renderings, and media files are downloaded.
The output is placed in a timestamped directory.
2. Deep Evaluation: Classifies content using external LLM APIs. OpenAI
gpt-4o-mini [33] (model snapshotgpt-4o-mini-2024-07-18, Chat Completions
API, accessed 2026-02-17) classifies text, andqwen/qwen2.5-vl-7b via LM Studio
(local OpenAI-compatible endpoint; LM Studio build not pinned in the repository)
performs vision-based analysis of media files. The result is a routing configuration
for the next stage.
3. RAG Preprocessing:Transforms DokuWiki syntax into Markdown with YAML
front matter. The output comprises 196 preprocessed pages and 320 media
descriptions. Each document receives structured metadata.
4. Embeddings Creator: Segments the Markdown documents context-aware into
chunks and converts them into 3,072-dimensional vectors using the embedding
model described in Section 4.2.2. The output is in JSONL format.
30
4.1 System Overview Jan Ritt, Imre Obermüller
5. Deploy: Loads the JSONL file into the Qdrant vector database. Three modes
are available: direct upsert via the Qdrant REST API, export to a monitored
directory (watchdog mode), or SCP transfer to the Raspberry Pi.
Each stage produces a clearly defined intermediate format. This makes the pipeline
modular: individual stages can be re-executed independently without running the entire
chain. Figure 4.2 shows the five stages with their concrete parameters and outputs.
Table 4.1 documents the data formats between stages.
Figure 4.2:Five-stage offline preparation pipeline with concrete parameters. Wiki
content is fetched via XML-RPC (196 pages, 320 media), quality-evaluated
by LLMs, chunked into up to 10,841 segments of 512 tokens (evaluation
corpus), embedded into 3,072-dimensional vectors, and indexed in Qdrant
(6,002 vectors, production run with stricter length filter).
The pipeline produces different output sizes at each stage. The wiki fetcher retrieves
196 content pages and 320 media files (516 raw documents in total). The deep evaluation
stage filters exactly 80 documents classified as empty, spam, or out of scope (516−436 =
80), yielding436Markdownfilesfordownstreamprocessing. Thechunkingstepgenerates
up to 10,841 text segments from the evaluation corpus, which uses all remaining
documents to maximize model-comparison coverage. The production embedding run
applies stricter content-length filtering and produces 6,002 vectors indexed in Qdrant.
This intentional discrepancy – evaluation corpus (10,841 chunks) versus production
index (6,002 vectors) – is discussed in detail in Section 6.3.4.
Query Phase: Runtime System
A typical search query at runtime traverses the following steps:
31
4.2 Component Architecture Jan Ritt, Imre Obermüller
Table 4.1: Data formats between pipeline stages.
Transition Format Description
Stage 1→ 2 TXT, JSON, HTML Raw wiki content, metadata, HTML renderings
Stage 2→ 3 YAML Routing configuration with classification results
Stage 3→ 4 Markdown + YAML Preprocessed documents with structured metadata
Stage 4→ 5 JSONL One JSON object per line with embedding vector
1. The AI client sends an MCP tool request to the domainleowiki-mcp.stream.
2. Caddy v2.9.1 terminates TLS and forwards the request to the MCP server.
3. The middleware validates the JWT token via Scalekit and checks the RBAC
permissions.
4. The MCP server performs a vector search in Qdrant.
5. The results are returned to the client as an MCP response.
The entire chain must complete within 2 seconds (NFR-1). The generation phase is
handled by the AI client itself – the MCP server delivers exclusively the relevant context
data.
4.2 Component Architecture
4.2.1 MCP Server Component
TheMCPserverformsthecentralcomponentoftheruntimesystem. Itisimplementedin
Python 3.13 using FastMCP 3.0 and processes MCP requests via JSON-RPC 2.0 [17, 34].
The server exposes 5 tools, 6 resources, and 2 prompts.
The processing of each request traverses a four-stage middleware chain:
1. Request Logging Middleware: Generates correlation IDs and captures re-
sponse times for monitoring.
2. User Context Middleware:Extracts JWT claims from the bearer token and
provides the user context.
3. RBAC Enforcement Middleware:Checks access authorization at the tool
level based on role claims.
32
4.2 Component Architecture Jan Ritt, Imre Obermüller
4. Audit Logging Middleware:Logs access in pseudonymized fashion for trace-
ability. No formal GDPR audit was performed; the SHA-256 hashing of user
identifiers serves as a first-level pseudonymization measure.
TheserversupportstwotransportprotocolspertheMCPspecification[ 3]: stdioforlocal
clients such as Claude Desktop (communication via stdin/stdout) andHTTP Stream-
able for web-based clients (port 8000 internally, Server-Sent Events for asynchronous
notifications). Additionally, an HTTP bridge (http_bridge.py) exists that connects
stdio-based clients with a remote HTTP Streamable server.
Figure 4.3 provides an overview of the three-tier component architecture, showing how
AI clients communicate with the FastMCP server layer via the MCP protocol, and how
the server queries the Qdrant vector database.
Figure 4.3:System component architecture. AI clients communicate with the FastMCP
server via the MCP protocol (JSON-RPC 2.0). The server applies RBAC
middleware to validate bearer tokens and enforce role-based access, then
queries the Qdrant vector database using cosine similarity search. The
OpenAI API is used exclusively during offline indexing (dashed border).
33
4.2 Component Architecture Jan Ritt, Imre Obermüller
4.2.2 Embedding Service Component
The embedding service is implemented as the fourth stage of the offline pipeline. The
ContentAwareChunker segments Markdown documents context-aware while respecting
semantic boundaries (headings, paragraphs, code sections). The resulting chunks
are converted via the OpenAI API using thetext-embedding-3-large model into
3,072-dimensional vectors [10].
Processing occurs in batch mode with a batch size of 20 chunks per API request and
integrated rate limiting. The output is stored in JSONL format, where each line is
a JSON object with the fieldsid (UUID), text (chunk content),embedding (3,072-
dimensional vector), andmetadata (title, page ID, namespace, chunk index, access
rights).
4.2.3 Retrieval Service Component
The retrieval service is integrated into the MCP server and communicates via the
Qdrant REST API on port 6333 [30]. For an incoming search query, the search text is
vectorized with the same embedding model and a cosine similarity search is performed
on the Qdrant collectioneducational_content [2].
Results are returned as structured JSON objects, where each hit contains the fields
text (chunk content),score (similarity value), andmetadata (title, namespace, page
ID, access rights). Filtering by access rights is performed already at the Qdrant level
via payload filters, so that students receive exclusively content released for them.
4.2.4 Authentication Component
Authentication is performed via OAuth 2.1 through Scalekit [22]. AI clients send a JWT
bearer token with every request. The User Context Middleware validates the token
via the Scalekit endpoint and extracts the contained role claims (student, teacher,
admin).
The server uses separate search tools instead of parameterized access con-
trol: search_content_student returns exclusively public content, while
search_content_teacher also includes internal content, as specified in Sec-
tion 3.4.2. The RBAC Enforcement Middleware checks at the tool level whether the
user’s role permits access to the requested tool.
34
4.3 Technology Decisions Jan Ritt, Imre Obermüller
4.2.5 Wiki Connector Component
The Wiki Connector is implemented as the first stage of the offline pipeline and
communicates with LeoWiki (leowiki.htl-leonding.ac.at) via the DokuWiki XML-
RPC API [32]. Authentication uses a bearer token stored in a separate.token file.
The connector downloads four data types:
• Page contents:Raw DokuWiki syntax as TXT files
• Metadata: Structured JSON files with author information, timestamps, and
access rights
• HTML renderings: Rendered page versions for quality control
• Media files: PDFs, images, and other embedded resources
As noted in Section 4.1.1, the wiki connector operates exclusively during offline prepa-
ration. Updates require re-executing the pipeline.
4.3 Technology Decisions
4.3.1 Vector Database: Qdrant
After evaluating Qdrant alongside the alternatives in Table 3.4, Qdrant v1.14.1 was
chosen as the vector database [30]. ChromaDB lacked native payload filtering for
RBAC enforcement; Milvus and Pinecone exceeded the deployment constraints. The
key decision criteria for Qdrant were:
• Resource efficiency:Qdrant is implemented in Rust and is suitable for operation
on a Raspberry Pi with limited memory.
• Payload filtering:Native support for metadata-based filtering, which is required
for role-based access control at the chunk level.
• Cosine similarity:Support for the cosine distance metric for semantic search [2].
• REST API:Simple integration via HTTP without additional client libraries.
• Docker support: Official Docker image available for ARM64 architecture.
The Qdrant instance manages a collection educational_content with 3,072-
dimensional vectors and cosine similarity as the distance metric.
35
4.3 Technology Decisions Jan Ritt, Imre Obermüller
4.3.2 Authentication Provider: Scalekit
Scalekit was chosen over Auth0 and Keycloak as the identity provider because it offers
a free tier sufficient for the project’s scale, requires no self-hosted infrastructure (unlike
Keycloak), and provides OAuth 2.1 with JWT-based authentication [22] out of the box.
The Python integration usesscalekit-sdk-python≥2.4.0 (configured February 2026).
The integration enables:
• Role-based claims:JWT tokens contain role claims (student, teacher, admin),
which are used directly for the RBAC decision.
• Token validation: Standards-compliant validation of bearer tokens without
implementing custom cryptography.
• Decoupling: User management resides outside the MCP server, which increases
maintainability.
4.3.3 Embedding Model Selection
The production deployment uses the embedding model described in Section 4.2.2. The
evaluation in Chapter 6.1 shows that the locally executable model Octen-Embedding-4B
achieves the best ranking quality (MRR 0.883), but requires 7.7 GB VRAM. Since
the target platform (Raspberry Pi 5, 8 GB RAM, no GPU) cannot run the 4B model
locally, OpenAI was selected for production (MRR 0.872;∆ 1.1 percentage points).
The detailed justification of this engineering trade-off is provided in Section 6.1.4.
4.3.4 Runtime Environment
The runtime system is based on the following technology decisions:
• Python 3.13:The MCP server is implemented in Python 3.13. The choice of
Python follows from the availability of the FastMCP framework and extensive
library support for NLP tasks. The evaluation stack uses Python 3.11 (see
Appendix .6).
• FastMCP 3.0: Framework for MCP protocol implementation with built-in
support for stdio and HTTP Streamable transport [34].
• Docker Compose v2.32:Orchestration of the four services (Caddy, MCP server,
Qdrant, Watchdog) with defined networks, volumes, and dependencies [31].
36
4.4 Interface Design Jan Ritt, Imre Obermüller
• Raspberry Pi (ARM64):Target platform for deployment, chosen due to low
operating costs and constant availability in the school network.
4.4 Interface Design
4.4.1 MCP Tool Interface
The MCP tools represent the primary interaction interface for AI clients. Each tool is
specified as an MCP tool definition with name, description, input schema, and access
rule. Table 4.2 provides an overview of the available tools.
Table 4.2: MCP tool definitions with input parameters and access rules.
Tool Input Access Output
search_content_student query , limit Student+ Chunks with score and source
search_content_teacher query , limit Teacher+ Chunks incl. internal content
get_collection_stats – Admin Vector count, dimensions
get_query_statistics – Admin Query history, response times
health_check – All Server status, uptime
Additionally, the server provides sixresources (admin-only; see Table 6.16 in Sec-
tion 6.6.3), which offer read-only access to static and dynamic information via URI
templates:
• leowiki://categories – Listing of content categories
• leowiki://access-levels – Documentation of the RBAC configuration
• leowiki://search-hints – Tips for optimal formulation of search queries
• leowiki://system-prompt – Guidelines for AI client interaction
• leowiki://stats – Live system statistics
• leowiki://recent/{count} – Recently updated content (parameterized)
Twoprompts define pre-built interaction patterns:explain_topic for pedagogical
explanations based on wiki content andsummarize_search for synthesizing search
results.
37
4.5 Deployment Architecture Jan Ritt, Imre Obermüller
4.4.2 Internal Service Interfaces
Communication between the MCP server and Qdrant uses the Qdrant REST API on
port 6333 [30]. The relevant endpoints are:
• POST /collections/{name}/points/search – Vector search with optional pay-
load filters
• GET /collections/{name} – Collection statistics query
• PUT /collections/{name}/points – Batch upsert (watchdog/deploy only)
Access to Qdrant occurs through the internal Docker networkmcp-backend; binding
to localhost is documented in Section 4.5. For administrative access from outside the
Docker stack, an SSH tunnel or Tailscale is used.
The connection between Caddy and the MCP server operates as an HTTP reverse
proxy. Caddy forwards incoming HTTPS requests tomcp-server:8000 and handles
TLS termination with automatic Let’s Encrypt certificate renewal [29, 28]. SSE support
is configured viaflush_interval -1 to enable real-time streaming.
4.4.3 External Integrations
The system interacts with several external services. Table 4.3 documents the endpoints
and protocols.
Table 4.3: External services and their protocols.
Service Protocol Endpoint Used by
DokuWiki XML-RPC leowiki.htl-leonding.ac.at Stage 1
OpenAI Emb. HTTPS REST api.openai.com/v1 Stage 4
OpenAI Chat HTTPS REST api.openai.com/v1 Stage 2
LM Studio HTTP <dev-machine>:1234/v1 Stages 2, 3
Qdrant HTTP REST localhost:6333 Stage 5, MCP
Scalekit OAuth 2.1 (env-specific) MCP server
4.5 Deployment Architecture
4.5.1 Container Architecture
The runtime system consists of four Docker services in two separate networks.
38
4.5 Deployment Architecture Jan Ritt, Imre Obermüller
Frontend Network (mcp-frontend)
The frontend network connects the two externally facing services:
• Caddy (reverse proxy): Receives incoming HTTPS requests on port 443, ter-
minates TLS with automatically managed Let’s Encrypt certificates [28], and
forwards to the MCP server. Security headers (HSTS, X-Frame-Options, X-
Content-Type-Options, Referrer-Policy) are set automatically. Caddy is the only
service with external port mapping (443, 80).
• MCP Server(Python 3.13, FastMCP 3.0): Processes MCP requests on port 8000
(internally reachable only). Implements the complete middleware chain and
authentication via OAuth 2.1 through Scalekit.
Backend Network (mcp-backend)
The backend network is not reachable from outside and connects:
• Qdrant: The vector database is bound exclusively on127.0.0.1:6333 (HTTP
REST) and127.0.0.1:6334 (gRPC). Persistent storage uses a Docker volume
(qdrant_data).
• Watchdog: Monitors an incoming directory (data/incoming/) for new JSONL
files and automatically performs batch upserts into Qdrant (100 points per request).
If needed, the collection is cleared before the update.
TheMCPserverisamemberofbothnetworksandservesasthesolebridgepointbetween
frontend and backend. This network separation follows the principle of minimal attack
surface [35]. Figure 4.4 visualizes the container architecture with both networks.
4.5.2 Deployment Options
The system supports three deployment modes for updating the vector data:
1. Direct upsert: The JSONL file is loaded directly into the target collection
via the Qdrant REST API. This mode is suitable for development and initial
population.
2. Watchdog mode: The JSONL file is exported to the monitored directory
data/incoming/. The watchdog service detects the new file automatically and
performs the batch upsert.
39
4.5 Deployment Architecture Jan Ritt, Imre Obermüller
Figure 4.4:Docker Compose container architecture with two isolated networks. Caddy is
the only externally exposed service. The MCP server bridges both networks;
Qdrant and Watchdog are isolated in the backend.
40
4.5 Deployment Architecture Jan Ritt, Imre Obermüller
3. SCP transfer: The JSONL file is transferred to the Raspberry Pi via SCP,
where it is processed by the watchdog service. This mode enables updates over
the network.
The target platform is a Raspberry Pi (ARM64) with Docker Compose. The domain
leowiki-mcp.stream is operated via Caddy with automatic TLS management.
4.5.3 Configuration Management
The system configuration follows a strict separation [31]:
• Static configuration: YAML files (config/env.yaml) contain model parame-
ters, chunk sizes, and API endpoints. These files are version-controlled.
• Secrets: Separate .token files (config/secrets/*.token) contain API keys
and authentication tokens. These are not included in version control.
• Docker configuration:The filedocker-compose.yml defines services, networks,
volumes, and environment variables.
• Manifest: Each pipeline output includes amanifest.json with timestamp,
configuration hash, and code version (NFR-3), ensuring reproducibility of all
processing steps.
41
5 MCP Server Implementation
Building on the architecture described in Chapter 4.2, this chapter documents the
development from a custom server implementation to FastMCP 3.0, the realization
of two transport protocols, the development of role-aware search tools protected by a
middleware chain, and a systematic compatibility analysis across current AI clients.
The production server is accessible athttps://leowiki-mcp.stream/mcp.
5.1 SDK Evolution and Migration
The MCP server went through four iterative implementation phases. Each phase
addressed limitations discovered during development and adopted new SDK capabilities
as they became available.
5.1.1 Phase 1: Custom MCP Server
The initial implementation used a custom server architecture with
two classes: BaseMCPServer (src/server/base.py) and HTTPMCPServer
(src/server/http_server.py). The HTTP server was built directly on
FastAPI 0.115 [36] and manually handled JSON-RPC 2.0 message routing [ 17],
Server-Sent Events (SSE) streaming, and tool dispatching.
This phase had several limitations:
• Only two tools (search_content, health_check).
• No MCP resources or prompts.
• A single search tool with anaccess_level parameter—a security weakness because
LLMs could manipulate the parameter.
• Manual JWT validation via JWKS URL.
• Manual SSE endpoint management.
42
5.1 SDK Evolution and Migration Imre Obermüller
5.1.2 Phase 2: FastMCP Adoption (v0.8.x)
The recognition that manual MCP protocol handling was error-prone and missing
critical features led to the adoption of FastMCP [34]. The first version used was
fastmcp>=0.8.0. This migration replaced the custom server classes with a single
FastMCP() instance and decorator-based tool registration.
The src/server/__init__.py file documents this transition:
“The old http_server.py and base.py are deprecated. We now use FastMCP
library in main.py instead of custom server implementation.”
A gap analysis documented indocs/refactor/LeoWiki_MCP_Enhancement_Plan.md
identified that most of FastMCP’s capabilities remained unused: no resources, no
prompts, no custom middleware, no tool annotations, no progress reporting, no error
masking, and no server instructions for LLM guidance.
5.1.3 Phase 3: Feature Completion (v2.x)
The third phase, implemented on the feature/professional-mcp-enhancements
branch, addressed all identified gaps. The changes were guided by an SDK reference doc-
ument (docs/refactor/FastMCP_SDK_Reference3.md) and a detailed enhancement
plan.
Key changes in this phase:
1. Two-tool RBAC:The singlesearch_content tool was split into two role-specific
tools (design rationale in Section 4.2.4), eliminating the parameter manipulation
vulnerability.
2. Four custom FastMCP middlewarecomponents for request logging, user con-
text extraction, RBAC enforcement, and audit logging, plus HTTP-level Scalekit
middleware (five layers in total; cf. Table 5.2).
3. Six MCP resourcesproviding metadata, statistics, and dynamic content.
4. Two MCP promptsfor educational interactions.
5. Lifespan dependency injectionvia theAppContext dataclass.
6. Tool annotations(readOnlyHint, idempotentHint, openWorldHint).
7. Progress reportingin search tools.
8. Error masking(mask_error_details=True).
43
5.1 SDK Evolution and Migration Imre Obermüller
5.1.4 Phase 4: FastMCP 3.0 Beta Migration
The final phase migrated tofastmcp>=3.0.0b2, which introduced breaking changes
and new features. Table 5.1 summarizes the breaking changes that required code
modifications.
Table 5.1: Breaking changes in the FastMCP 3.0 migration.
Area FastMCP 2.x (old) FastMCP 3.0 (new)
Duplicate handler on_duplicate_tools="error" on_duplicate="error"
Context state (read) ctx.get_state("key") (sync) await ctx.get_state("key")
(async)
Context state (write) ctx.set_state("key", val)
(sync)
await ctx.set_state("key",
val) (async)
The sync-to-async migration of context state methods—reflecting Python’s broader
adoption of native coroutines [37]—affected approximately 50 code locations across
search_tools.py and mcp_middleware.py. Each location is annotated with a #
FastMCP 3.0: async methods comment for traceability.
FastMCP 3.0 also introduced features used by the server:
• ResourcesAsTools and PromptsAsTools transforms: Expose resources and
prompts as callable tools, providing backward compatibility with AI clients that do
not natively support these primitives.
• Server icon:The Icon class frommcp.types provides a logo image via data URI,
displayed in client UIs.
• strict_input_validation: Enables stricter validation of tool arguments with
better error messages.
• mcp.http_app(path="/mcp"): Creates a clean ASGI application for mounting in
a FastAPI host.
5.1.5 Evolution Summary
Table 5.2 summarizes the capability growth across all four phases.
Figure 5.1 visualizes the four-phase progression and highlights the growing capabilities
at each stage.
44
5.1 SDK Evolution and Migration Imre Obermüller
Table 5.2: Server evolution across four development phases.
Phase Tools Res. Prompts MW RBAC
v1.0 (raw SDK) 2 0 0 1 Parameter-based
v1.x (FastMCP 0.8) 2 0 0 1 Parameter-based
v2.0 (FastMCP 2.x) 5 6 2 5 Two-tool + middleware
v2.1 (FastMCP 3.0b) 5 6 2 5 + Transforms
Figure 5.1:MCP SDK evolution across four development phases. The current de-
ployment (v2.1) uses FastMCP 3.0 (Phase 4), which adds the most SDK
abstraction among the four phases, including RBAC middleware and HTTP
Streamable transport.
45
5.2 Server Initialization and Configuration Imre Obermüller
5.2 Server Initialization and Configuration
The server’s entry point ismain.py, which orchestrates the initialization of all compo-
nents. Listing 5.1 shows the FastMCP 3.0 constructor with the production configura-
tion.
1 mcp = FastMCP(
2 name=config.server_name,
3 version=config.server_version,
4 website_url="https://leowiki.htl-leonding.ac.at",
5 icons=[server_icon] if server_icon else None,
6 instructions="""
7 LeoWiki MCP Server - HTL Leonding
8 Du bist ein Assistent fuer Schueler und Lehrer.
9 TOOLS:
10 - search_content_student: Suche (eingeschraenkt)
11 - search_content_teacher: Suche (voller Zugriff)
12 - get_collection_stats: Statistiken (Admin)
13 - get_query_statistics: Analytics (Admin)
14 - health_check: Server-Status
15 RESOURCES (6): leowiki://categories, ...
16 PROMPTS (2): explain_topic, summarize_search
17 SPRACHE: Deutsch
18 AUTH: OAuth 2.1 via Scalekit
19 """,
20 mask_error_details=True,
21 strict_input_validation=True,
22 on_duplicate="error",
23 lifespan=app_lifespan,
24 )
Listing 5.1:FastMCP 3.0 server initialization (main.py).
Server capabilities (I2). When a client connects, the MCP protocol mandates an
initializehandshake in which the server advertises its capabilities. The LeoWiki MCP
server responds with the following capability set (theprotocolVersion field reflects
the revision the server was built against, not the latest specification revision):
46
5.2 Server Initialization and Configuration Imre Obermüller
1 {
2 "protocolVersion": "2025-03-26",
3 "capabilities": {
4 "tools": { "listChanged": true },
5 "resources": { "listChanged": true, "subscribe": false },
6 "prompts": { "listChanged": true },
7 "logging": {}
8 },
9 "serverInfo": {
10 "name": "leowiki-mcp",
11 "version": "1.0.0"
12 }
13 }
Listing 5.2:Server capabilities returned in theinitializeresponse (protocol version reflects
the revision the server was built against; the latest MCP specification revision
is 2025-11-25, see Section 5.10).
The listChanged flag enables clients to detect dynamic tool registration changes. The
server exposes 5 tools (Section 5.6), 6 resources, and 2 prompts. Thelogging capability
advertises support for structured log messages transmitted via MCP notifications.
Upgrading to the newer specification revision (2025-11-25) was not required, as that
revision introduced capability extensions not used by the current implementation; all
five tested clients negotiate successfully against revision 2025-03-26 (Section 5.10).
Configuration management. The server configuration is managed through a
ServerConfig class based on Pydantic Settings v2.x (Pydantic v2) [38], which provides
typed configuration with over 40 fields, environment variable binding, automatic valida-
tion, and sensible defaults. Configuration sections include transport settings, HTTP
options, vector database connection, embedding model, Scalekit OAuth parameters,
RBAC settings, rate limiting, and logging.
Dependency injection. The app_lifespan context manager initializes the
QdrantBackend (Qdrant v1.14.1), EmbeddingService, ServerConfig, and an in-
memory cache at server startup. These dependencies are bundled in a typedAppContext
dataclass and made available to all tools viactx.lifespan_context:
47
5.3 Transport Protocols Imre Obermüller
1 @dataclass
2 class AppContext:
3 qdrant: QdrantBackend
4 embedding_service: EmbeddingService
5 config: ServerConfig
6 cache: dict
7
8 @asynccontextmanager
9 async def app_lifespan(server: FastMCP) -> AsyncIterator[AppContext]:
10 config = ServerConfig()
11 qdrant = QdrantBackend(
12 url=config.vector_db_url,
13 api_key=config.vector_db_api_key
14 )
15 embedding_service = EmbeddingService(
16 api_key=config.openai_api_key,
17 model=config.embedding_model,
18 dimensions=config.vector_dimensions
19 )
20 cache = {}
21 try:
22 yield AppContext(
23 qdrant=qdrant,
24 embedding_service=embedding_service,
25 config=config, cache=cache)
26 finally:
27 cache.clear()
28 logger.info("Cleanup complete")
Listing 5.3:Lifespan-based dependency injection (src/server/lifespan.py).
5.3 Transport Protocols
As introduced in Section 4.2.1, the server supports two transport protocols [3]: HTTP
Streamable as the primary production transport andstdio as a local development
fallback. The transport is selected at startup via a command-line flag:
48
5.3 Transport Protocols Imre Obermüller
1 if __name__ == "__main__":
2 if "--http" in sys.argv:
3 # HTTP mode: production behind Caddy
4 uvicorn.run(app, host=config.http_host,
5 port=config.server_port)
6 else:
7 # STDIO mode: local development
8 mcp.run()
Listing 5.4:Transport mode selection (main.py).
5.3.1 HTTP Streamable Transport
The HTTP Streamable transport is the primary production mode. FastMCP 3.0’s
mcp.http_app(path="/mcp") method creates an ASGI application that is mounted
into a FastAPI host [36]:
1 mcp_app = mcp.http_app(path="/mcp")
2 app = FastAPI(
3 title=config.server_name,
4 version=config.server_version,
5 lifespan=mcp_app.lifespan
6 )
7 # Middleware, OAuth routes, etc.
8 app.mount("/", mcp_app)
Listing 5.5:ASGI app mounting (main.py).
In production, the server runs behind Caddy v2.9.1 (Alpine image) as a reverse proxy [28]
that handles TLS termination via Let’s Encrypt and SSE configuration. The Caddyfile
configures flush_interval -1 (immediate flushing for SSE), no caching for event-
stream responses, and extended read/write timeouts for long-running operations.
5.3.2 Client Integration via Direct URL
AI clients connect to the server by registering the production URL
https://leowiki-mcp.stream/mcp in their settings. No npx commands, bridge
scripts, or local installations are required:
• Claude Desktop / Claude Web:Register as a remote MCP server. The Scalekit
OAuth redirect handles authentication automatically.
• ChatGPT: Register as an “App” via the ChatGPT interface.
• Mistral: Register as a remote tool connector.
49
5.3 Transport Protocols Imre Obermüller
The http_bridge.py file in the repository is a development-only fallback tool that
translates betweenstdio and HTTP. It is not required for production use.
5.3.3 stdio Transport
The stdio transport runs the server as a local child process of the AI client. When
started without the–http flag, the server callsmcp.run(), which reads JSON-RPC 2.0
messages fromstdin and writes responses tostdout.
Limitation. The stdio transport does not support OAuth authentication because
there is no HTTP endpoint to initiate the authorization flow. The server assigns a
configurable default role forstdio connections.
5.3.4 Transport Comparison
Table 5.3 summarizes the characteristics of each transport and the recommended use
cases.
Table 5.3: Transport comparison and recommendations.
Criterion HTTP Streamable stdio
Authentication OAuth 2.1 via Scalekit Default role only
Concurrent users Yes (async event loop) No (single process)
Remote access Yes (Caddy + TLS) Local only
SSE streaming Yes (progress, notifications) Via stdout
Setup complexity Docker Compose + Caddy Single command
Transport overhead ∼113ms (σ=8.0) ∼18ms (σ=0.2)
Use case Production, multi-user Local development
Transport overhead. To quantify the transport overhead (research question I3),
a benchmark suite was executed on the production hardware (Raspberry Pi 5,
8GB RAM). 1 Transport overhead was isolated using thehealth_check tool (min-
imal payload) with 20 iterations per transport after one warm-up request, timed
via time.perf_counter(). The stdio transport achieved a mean latency of 17.9ms
1The runs use the same Raspberry Pi 5 as production; the scripts still print “Raspberry Pi 4” because
they parse /proc/cpuinfo, which does not name the board generation explicitly on the Pi 5. A more
reliable method would becat /proc/device-tree/model , which returns the full board name; this
is noted for a future update of the benchmark scripts.
50
5.4 OAuth 2.1 Authentication Imre Obermüller
(σ=0.2ms), while HTTP Streamable averaged 113.1ms (σ=8.0ms), yielding a 6.3×
speedup for stdio. The∼95ms overhead of the HTTP path is attributable to TLS
handshake (∼30–50ms), network round-trip via Tailscale VPN (∼50–80ms), and Caddy
reverse proxy processing (∼5–10ms).
Search pipeline latency. A separate benchmark measured the core search pipeline
without MCP protocol overhead, using 78 ground-truth Q&A pairs over three iterations
(234 requests total).
Table 5.4: Search pipeline latency (78 queries× 3 iterations = 234 requests,
Raspberry Pi 5).
Component Mean (ms) Median (ms) P95 (ms) Min (ms) Max (ms)
Embedding (OpenAI API) 181.8 174.8 n/a † 144.3 434.4
Vector search (Qdrant) 26.1 22.9 n/a † 21.4 50.0
Total 207.9 199.7 263.6 167.1 459.7
†P95 is reported for the total pipeline only; component-level P95 was not separately measured in this
benchmark run.
Table 5.4 breaks down the latency. Embedding generation via the OpenAI API accounts
for 87% of the total latency (mean 181.8ms), while the Qdrant HNSW vector search
over 6082 documents2 contributes only 13% (mean 26.1ms). Query difficulty (easy,
medium, hard) does not significantly affect latency, as both embedding generation and
cosine similarity search have approximately constant per-query cost. The overall P95
latency of 263.6ms confirms that the search pipeline alone is well within the NFR-1
target of 2s. Combined with the transport overhead, estimated end-to-end latency is
∼226ms via stdio and∼321ms via HTTP—both acceptable for interactive use.
The production deployment exclusively uses HTTP Streamable transport because
a school wiki requires concurrent multi-user access with authentication. Figure 5.2
illustrates the architectural differences between both transport modes.
5.4 OAuth 2.1 Authentication
Extending the authentication architecture outlined in Section 4.2.4, the implementation
uses the Scalekit Python SDK≥2.4.0 with Proof Key for Code Exchange (PKCE). The
2The production embedding run (2026-02-26) produced 6,002 vectors; the collection had grown to
6,082 points by the benchmark date (2026-03-21) due to an incremental re-ingestion run that added
80 newly published wiki pages. The 10,841 chunks reported in the evaluation corpus (Appendix .6.6)
were produced by a separate pass with 512-token chunking and no minimum length filter.
51
5.4 OAuth 2.1 Authentication Imre Obermüller
Figure 5.2:MCP transport comparison. stdio is used during development for low-
latency local access; HTTP Streamable is used in production for network
accessibility and multi-client Bearer token authentication.
52
5.4 OAuth 2.1 Authentication Imre Obermüller
ScalekitAuthMiddleware intercepts all incoming requests and validates Bearer tokens
before they reach the MCP protocol layer.
Token validation. The ScalekitAuthMiddleware (src/middleware/
scalekit_auth.py) intercepts every HTTP request and validates Bearer to-
kens using the official Scalekit Python SDK. Listing 5.6 shows the core validation
logic.
53
5.4 OAuth 2.1 Authentication Imre Obermüller
1 class ScalekitAuthMiddleware:
2 def __init__(self, config: ServerConfig):
3 self.config = config # retained for __call__
4 self.scalekit_client = ScalekitClient(
5 env_url=config.scalekit_env_url,
6 client_id=config.scalekit_client_id,
7 client_secret=config.scalekit_client_secret
8 )
9 self.www_authenticate_header = {
10 "WWW-Authenticate": (
11 f’Bearer realm="OAuth", ’
12 f’resource_metadata="’
13 f’{config.scalekit_expected_audience}’
14 f’/.well-known/oauth-protected-resource"’
15 )
16 }
17
18 async def __call__(self, request, call_next):
19 if self._is_public_endpoint(request.url.path):
20 return await call_next(request)
21 token = request.headers.get("authorization", "")
22 if not token.startswith("Bearer "):
23 return Response(status_code=401,
24 headers=self.www_authenticate_header)
25 validation_options = TokenValidationOptions(
26 issuer=self.config.scalekit_env_url,
27 audience=[self.config.scalekit_expected_audience]
28 )
29 is_valid = self.scalekit_client \
30 .validate_access_token(
31 token[7:], options=validation_options)
32 if not is_valid:
33 return Response(status_code=401,
34 headers=self.www_authenticate_header)
35 return await call_next(request)
Listing 5.6:Scalekit OAuth 2.1 token validation (scalekit_auth.py).
Public endpoints (/health, /.well-known/*, /auth/*, /favicon.ico) bypass authen-
tication entirely via the_is_public_endpoint check, enabling OAuth discovery and
health monitoring without credentials.
54
5.5 FastMCP 3.0 Middleware Chain Imre Obermüller
OAuth flow endpoints. The server exposes four OAuth endpoints via a dedicated
APIRouter (src/auth/oauth_flow.py):
• /auth/login: Initiates the Authorization Code flow with PKCE
(secrets.token_urlsafe(32)) and CSRF state generation, then redirects
to Scalekit’s/oauth/authorize endpoint.
• /callback: Handles the redirect from Scalekit, validates the CSRF state, and
exchanges the authorization code for access and refresh tokens viahttpx≥0.25.0
POST to/oauth/token.
• /auth/logout: Redirects to Scalekit’s/logout endpoint to end the SSO session,
optionally passing theid_token_hint.
• /auth/user: Returns the current authenticated user’s information (user ID, email,
name, role, organization) extracted from the validated JWT.
OAuth discovery. The server provides two discovery endpoints following the OAuth
Protected Resource pattern:
• /.well-known/oauth-protected-resource: Returns metadata including the au-
thorization server URL, supported scopes, and the Bearer token method. This
endpoint is essential for Claude Desktop and other OAuth-aware MCP clients.
• /.well-known/oauth-authorization-server: Redirects (HTTP 302) to Scalekit’s
OIDC configuration at<env_url>/.well-known/openid-configuration, bridging
the gap between OAuth 2.1 and OIDC discovery standards.
A /register endpoint returns HTTP 400 with a clear error message, informing clients
that dynamic client registration is not supported and that clients must be pre-registered
in the Scalekit dashboard.
5.5 FastMCP 3.0 Middleware Chain
Beyond the HTTP-level Scalekit middleware, the server implements four custom
FastMCP middleware components that operate at the MCP protocol level. Table 5.5
describes the five-layer chain through which every request passes.
Figure 5.3 visualizes the request flow through all five layers.
These are registered in order inmain.py:
55
5.5 FastMCP 3.0 Middleware Chain Imre Obermüller
Figure 5.3:FastMCP middleware pipeline. Each request passes through authentication,
RBAC permission checking, and audit logging before reaching the tool
handler and Qdrant vector database. Error paths (stages 1–4) short-circuit
with standard HTTP error codes.
56
5.5 FastMCP 3.0 Middleware Chain Imre Obermüller
Table 5.5: Five-layer middleware pipeline.
Layer Middleware Level Responsibility
1 ScalekitAuthMW HTTP JWT Bearer token validation
2 RequestLoggingMW FastMCP UUID correlation ID, timing
3 UserContextMW FastMCP JWT decode, role extraction
4 RBACEnforcementMW FastMCP Tool filtering, access control
5 AuditLoggingMW FastMCP Pseudonymized audit logging
1 mcp.add_middleware(RequestLoggingMiddleware())
2 mcp.add_middleware(UserContextMiddleware())
3 mcp.add_middleware(RBACEnforcementMiddleware())
4 mcp.add_middleware(AuditLoggingMiddleware())
Listing 5.7:Middleware registration (main.py).
5.5.1 RequestLoggingMiddleware
Generates a UUID-based correlation ID for each request, records the start time, and
logs the request method and duration on completion. The correlation ID is stored in
the FastMCP context state viaawait ctx.set_state("request_id", ...) and is
available to all downstream middleware and tools.
5.5.2 UserContextMiddleware
Extracts user identity and role from the JWT Bearer token. Since the token’s cryp-
tographic signature has already been validated by theScalekitAuthMiddleware, this
middleware performs a decode-only operation to extract the claims.
The role extraction uses a multi-fallback strategy to accommodate different identity
provider configurations. Scalekit may place role information in different JWT claims
depending on the organization’s configuration:
57
5.5 FastMCP 3.0 Middleware Chain Imre Obermüller
1 user_role = (
2 claims.get("role") or
3 claims.get("roles") or
4 claims.get("user_role") or
5 claims.get("custom:role") or
6 claims.get("https://leowiki.htl-leonding.ac.at/role")
7 or "student"
8 )
9 if isinstance(user_role, list) and user_role:
10 user_role = user_role[0]
11
12 # Check groups claim (common IdP pattern)
13 groups = claims.get("groups", [])
14 if isinstance(groups, list):
15 if "admin" in groups or "admins" in groups:
16 user_role = "admin"
17 elif "teacher" in groups or "lehrer" in groups:
18 user_role = "teacher"
19
20 # Check scoped roles (e.g., "role:admin")
21 for scope in claims.get("scope", "").split():
22 if scope.startswith("role:"):
23 user_role = scope.split(":")[1]
24 break
Listing 5.8:Multi-fallback role extraction (mcp_middleware.py).
This defensive approach resolves roles from multiple claim shapes; it has been exercised
against Scalekit with the HTL Leonding IdP configuration (role and groups claims),
and the fallback chain is structured to accommodate additional OIDC providers if
needed.
5.5.3 RBACEnforcementMiddleware
This middleware enforces tool-level access control following the RBAC model defined by
NIST [26] by maintaining aTOOL_PERMISSIONS dictionary that maps each tool name
to the set of roles permitted to invoke it:
58
5.5 FastMCP 3.0 Middleware Chain Imre Obermüller
1 TOOL_PERMISSIONS = {
2 "search_content_student": {"student", "teacher", "admin"},
3 "search_content_teacher": {"teacher", "admin"},
4 "get_collection_stats": {"admin"},
5 "get_query_statistics": {"admin"},
6 "list_resources": {"admin"},
7 "read_resource": {"admin"},
8 }
Listing 5.9:RBAC tool permissions (mcp_middleware.py).
Note: list_resources and read_resource appear here because FastMCP exposes
resources through the same permission path when theResourcesAsTools transform is
enabled; they are not separate hand-written tools alongside the five named MCP tools.
The health_check tool is intentionally omitted from this dictionary: tools not listed in
TOOL_PERMISSIONS bypass RBAC enforcement and are available to all authenticated
users, consistent with Table 4.2 (“All” access).
The middleware implements two hooks:
• on_list_tools: Filters the tool list to show only tools the user’s role is permitted
to access.
• on_call_tool: Checks that the user’s role is in the permitted set before allowing
execution. Unauthorized invocations raise aToolError.
5.5.4 AuditLoggingMiddleware
Logs every tool invocation with a pseudonymized user identifier (SHA-256 hash of
user_id), the tool name, and the timestamp. This audit trail is separate from the query
logging system (Section 5.8) and serves compliance and debugging purposes.
5.5.5 Middleware vs. Controller Pattern
The choice of middleware over the traditional controller pattern—documented in
docs/AUTHENTICATION_ARCHITECTURE.md—addresses cross-cutting concerns. In the
controller pattern, each tool handler would individually check authentication and
authorization. The middleware pattern centralizes these checks:
• Consistency: Every request passes through the same chain.
• Separation of concerns:Tool handlers focus on business logic.
59
5.6 Two-Tool RBAC Search Architecture Imre Obermüller
• Layered checking:The middleware chain implements multiple independent check-
points, so a failure in one layer does not bypass the others.
• Testability: Middleware can be tested in isolation.
5.6 Two-Tool RBAC Search Architecture
As described in Section 4.2.4, the search functionality is separated into two role-specific
tools (search_content_student and search_content_teacher) to implement RBAC
at the architectural level. This section details the implementation. Figure 5.4 provides
an overview.
Figure 5.4:RBAC architecture for the LeoWiki MCP server. Two tool-level access tiers
prevent students from accessing teacher-restricted wiki content. All requests
require a valid JWT Bearer token; the role claim determines which tools
and resources are accessible.
60
5.6 Two-Tool RBAC Search Architecture Imre Obermüller
5.6.1 Student Search Tool
The student tool provides access to student-accessible content by applying Python
post-filtering with dynamic oversampling. When RBAC is enabled, the tool fetches
3× the requested number of results from Qdrant, filters out entries withteacher:
namespace prefixes, and returns the filtered results. If insufficient results remain, it
doubles the fetch limit up to a maximum of10× the original request.
1 @mcp.tool(
2 name="search_content_student",
3 description="Search educational content "
4 "with student-level access",
5 annotations=ToolAnnotations(
6 title="LeoWiki Student Search",
7 readOnlyHint=True,
8 idempotentHint=True,
9 openWorldHint=False,
10 )
11 )
12 async def search_content_student(
13 query: str, limit: int = 10, ctx: Context = None
14 ) -> dict:
15 results = []
16 fetch_limit = limit * 3
17 max_fetch = limit * 10
18 while len(results) < limit and fetch_limit <= max_fetch:
19 raw = db.search(query_vector=embedding,
20 collection=collection,
21 limit=fetch_limit)
22 results = [r for r in raw
23 if "teacher:" not in
24 r.payload.get("source", "")]
25 if len(results) < limit:
26 fetch_limit *= 2
27 results = results[:limit]
Listing 5.10:Student search with dynamic oversampling (search_tools.py).
The tool also integrates progress reporting (4 steps: embedding, filtering, search,
formatting) and UX-optimized result formatting with query logging.
61
5.6 Two-Tool RBAC Search Architecture Imre Obermüller
5.6.2 Teacher Search Tool
The teacher tool provides unrestricted access to all content without post-filtering. Its
implementation delegates directly to Qdrant without namespace restrictions. Teachers
can useboth tools: the student tool to see what students see, and the teacher tool for
full access.
5.6.3 Admin Tools
Two additional tools are restricted to the admin role:
• get_collection_stats: Returns Qdrant collection statistics including total docu-
ment count, RBAC distribution across namespaces, optimizer status, and storage
details.
• get_query_statistics: Analyzes the persistent query log (Section 5.8) and returns
aggregate statistics: total queries, breakdown by user role (student, teacher,
admin), and breakdown by tool name.
A globalhealth_check tool is available to all roles and returns the server name, version,
and status.
5.6.4 Design Rationale: Two Tools vs. Single Tool
An alternative design would use a single tool with arole parameter. The two-tool
architecture was chosen because:
1. Reduced attack surface:The LLM cannot manipulate access level parameters—
the tool boundary is the security boundary.
2. Clearer LLM semantics:Two tools with distinct descriptions produce better tool
selection by the LLM.
3. Middleware-level enforcement: The RBAC middleware controls which tools
appear in thetools/list response, providing an additional layer of defense.
62
5.7 MCP Resources and Prompts Imre Obermüller
5.7 MCP Resources and Prompts
5.7.1 Resources
The server exposes six MCP resources—four static and two dynamic—all restricted to
admin access via the RBAC middleware. Table 5.6 lists them.
Table 5.6: MCP resources exposed by the LeoWiki MCP server.
Type URI Description
Static leowiki://categories Content categories with descriptions
Static leowiki://access-levels RBAC documentation
Static leowiki://search-hints Tips for effective search queries
Static leowiki://system-prompt Behavioral guidelines for LLMs
Dynamic leowiki://stats Live Qdrant collection statistics
Dynamic leowiki://recent/{count} Recently updated content
Resources are registered via decorator-based functions using FastMCP’s@mcp.resource
decorator. Listing 5.11 shows the registration pattern for the content categories re-
source.
1 @mcp.resource(
2 uri="leowiki://categories",
3 name="Content Categories",
4 description="Available content categories in LeoWiki",
5 mime_type="application/json",
6 tags={"metadata", "navigation"}
7 )
8 def get_categories() -> str:
9 categories = [
10 {"id": "sew", "name_de": "Softwareentwicklung",
11 "description": "OOP, Design Patterns, Web"},
12 {"id": "nwt", "name_de": "Netzwerktechnik",
13 "description": "Cisco, Protocols, Security"},
14 # ...
15 ]
16 return json.dumps(categories, ensure_ascii=False)
Listing 5.11:Resource registration (src/resources/metadata.py).
The admin-only restriction (enforced byRBACEnforcementMiddleware, not by the
resource itself) prevents prompt injection via resource content and hides architectural
details from unprivileged users.
63
5.8 Query Logging Imre Obermüller
5.7.2 Prompts
Two educational prompt templates are registered:
• explain_topic: Generates a structured explanation of a topic at a configurable
difficulty level (beginner, intermediate, advanced). The prompt instructs the LLM
to provide a definition, core concepts, practical relevance, practical examples with
common mistakes (if enabled), and a summary.
• summarize_search: Synthesizes search results into a coherent summary, including
guidelines for cross-referencing multiple sources and identifying key findings.
5.7.3 FastMCP 3.0 Transforms
A practical challenge discovered during client testing was that not all AI clients natively
support MCP resources and prompts. For example, Claude Desktop supports all three
primitives, but ChatGPT only supports tools.
FastMCP 3.0 introducestransforms that solve this compatibility problem by wrapping
resources and prompts as additional tools:
1 from fastmcp.server.transforms import (
2 ResourcesAsTools, PromptsAsTools
3 )
4
5 mcp.add_transform(ResourcesAsTools(mcp))
6 mcp.add_transform(PromptsAsTools(mcp))
Listing 5.12:Transform registration (main.py).
With these transforms, a client that only supportstools/list and tools/call can still
access resources (via a generatedread_resource_* tool) and prompts (via a generated
use_prompt_* tool).
5.8 Query Logging
To enable educational analytics while respecting GDPR requirements [ 39], the
server implements a persistent query logging system. The QueryLogger class
(src/utils/query_logger.py) is a thread-safe singleton that appends each search
query as a JSON line to adata/statistics/queries.jsonl file.
64
5.8 Query Logging Imre Obermüller
Listing 5.13 shows the core logging method. Thread safety is ensured through a module-
level threading.Lock so that concurrent search requests from multiple users do not
corrupt the log file.
1 class QueryLogger:
2 def log_query(self, query, response, user_role,
3 tool_name, result_count,
4 user_id_hash=None, request_id=None,
5 duration_ms=None):
6 entry = {
7 "timestamp": datetime.now().isoformat(),
8 "query": query,
9 "response_preview": response[:500],
10 "response_length": len(response),
11 "user_role": user_role,
12 "tool_name": tool_name,
13 "result_count": result_count,
14 "user_id_hash": user_id_hash,
15 "request_id": request_id,
16 "duration_ms": duration_ms
17 }
18 with _write_lock:
19 with open(self.log_file, "a") as f:
20 f.write(json.dumps(entry) + "\n")
Listing 5.13:Thread-safe query logging (query_logger.py).
Each log entry contains:
• Timestamp (ISO 8601), query text, response preview (first 500 characters).
• User role (student, teacher, admin), tool name, result count.
• Pseudonymized user ID (SHA-256 hash ofuser_id)—the original identifier is never
persisted.
• Request correlation ID (fromRequestLoggingMiddleware) and response duration
in milliseconds.
The get_query_statistics admin tool (Section 5.6.3) reads this log and computes
aggregate statistics (total queries, breakdown by role, breakdown by tool), enabling
educators to understand how the wiki is being searched without exposing individual
user identities. The singleton pattern restricts the process to a singleQueryLogger
instance regardless of how many concurrent requests arrive:
65
5.9 Error Handling and Security Imre Obermüller
1 _query_logger: Optional[QueryLogger] = None
2 _logger_lock = threading.Lock()
3
4 def get_query_logger() -> QueryLogger:
5 global _query_logger
6 if _query_logger is None:
7 with _logger_lock:
8 if _query_logger is None: # Double-check
9 _query_logger = QueryLogger()
10 return _query_logger
Listing 5.14:Thread-safe singleton pattern (query_logger.py).
5.9 Error Handling and Security
The server employs multiple independent security layers.
Error masking. mask_error_details=True (FastMCP 3.0 constructor parameter)
prevents internal error details—stack traces, database connection strings, file paths—
from reaching clients. Detailed errors are logged server-side at theERROR level for
debugging while clients receive a generic “Internal server error” message. Additionally,
each search tool wraps its logic in atry/except block that returns a user-friendly
German error message ("Es ist ein Fehler bei der Suche aufgetreten.") rather
than leaking implementation details.
Request size limit. A customRequestSizeLimitMiddleware (implemented as a Star-
lette BaseHTTPMiddleware) rejects requests exceeding 1MB with HTTP 413, protecting
against Denial-of-Service attacks via oversized payloads.
Rate limiting. The slowapi library (v0.1.9) enforces configurable per-IP rate limits
(default: 100requests/minute, configurablevia MAX_REQUESTS_PER_MINUTEenvironment
variable). Exceeded limits return HTTP 429 with aRetry-After header. Rate limiting
is enabled by default but can be disabled for local development.
CORS policy. CORS is currentlydisabled in production for maximum MCP client
compatibility, since desktop AI clients (Claude, ChatGPT, Mistral) bypass browser
CORS entirely. The codebase includes a pre-configured CORS allowlist (claude.ai,
leowiki-mcp.stream, leowiki.htl-leonding.ac.at, and localhost origins) that
66
5.10 Compatibility Analysis Imre Obermüller
can be activated via an environment variable when browser-based access is needed in
the future.
Input validation. strict_input_validation=True (FastMCP 3.0) validates tool
arguments against their type annotations before execution. Search queries are addi-
tionally validated for non-empty content, and the result limit is bounded to the range
[1, 20].
5.10 Compatibility Analysis
Research question I5 asks whether MCP is suitable as a standardized interface for inte-
grating knowledge sources into various AI applications. The server was tested with three
AI clients via direct remote URL registration athttps://leowiki-mcp.stream/mcp.
The interoperability session was performed on 2026-02-20 with the then-current client
builds:3
Manual test protocol (2026-02-20). Each client was registered against
https://leowiki-mcp.stream/mcp. Success required completing OAuth 2.1 via
Scalekit, listing the expected tools for the selected test account, and executing at
least onesearch_content_* call with the German query“Was ist das OSI-Modell?”
without transport errors. Resource and prompt availability was checked against Ta-
ble 5.7.
5.10.1 OAuth 2.1 Authentication Flow
The authentication flow is identical across all tested clients. After registering the
server URL, the client initiates an OAuth 2.1 redirect to the Scalekit identity provider.
The user enters their email address, receives a one-time code via email, and enters
it to complete authentication. Figures 5.5 and 5.6 show the redirect and code entry
steps.
3Claude Web App (Pro plan) and Claude Desktop for macOS, build February 2026; ChatGPT desktop
for macOS/Windows (Plus plan), build February 2026; Mistral Le Chat web (free tier, beta connectors),
accessed 2026-02-20. The MCP connector configuration in these clients follows the specification
revision dated 2025-11-25.
67
5.10 Compatibility Analysis Imre Obermüller
Figure 5.5: OAuth 2.1 redirect to Scalekit login page (identical across all clients).
68
5.10 Compatibility Analysis Imre Obermüller
Figure 5.6: One-time code entry during OAuth authentication.
69
5.10 Compatibility Analysis Imre Obermüller
5.10.2 Claude (Desktop, Web, Mobile)
Anthropic, the creator of the MCP specification, supports MCP connectors on all
three platforms (Web, Desktop, Mobile). Connectors require a Pro Plan subscription.
Registration is performed in the Claude Web App via[+]→ Add connectors→
Manage connectors→ Add custom connectors (Figure 5.7).
Figure 5.7:Registering the LeoWiki MCP server as a custom connector in Claude Web
App.
Once the connector is registered in the Claude Web App,it works without further
configuration in Claude Desktop and Claude Mobile (Android)as well. Fig-
ure 5.8 shows the connector configuration with all role-based tools visible. Figure 5.9
demonstrates a live search query execution in the Claude Web App.
Figure 5.8:Connector configuration in Claude showing tools, resources, and role-based
permissions.
5.10.3 ChatGPT (Desktop, Web, Mobile)
OpenAI supports MCP servers as “Apps” (previously called “Connectors”). At least a
Plus Plan is required. Registration followsSettings→ Apps→ Create app. When
70
5.10 Compatibility Analysis Imre Obermüller
Figure 5.9:Claude Web App executing a search query against the LeoWiki MCP server.
registering via the Desktop App, the user is redirected to the Web App for the OAuth
flow and then returned to the Desktop client (Figure 5.10).
Figure 5.10: ChatGPT Desktop after successful OAuth authentication and tool execu-
tion.
5.10.4 Mistral Le Chat (Web, Mobile)
Mistral supports remote MCP servers as “Connectors” in their Le Chat interface. The
connector feature is still in Beta and available in the free tier, making it the only tested
client that does not require a paid subscription. Mistral operates under European data
protection jurisdiction. No Desktop application is currently available. Configuration
lists available tools, prompts, resources, and allowances under the name “Functions”
71
5.10 Compatibility Analysis Imre Obermüller
(Figure 5.11). Figure 5.12 shows a successful tool execution in the Mistral Le Chat
interface.
Figure 5.11: Mistral Le Chat showing connector with listed tools (“Functions”).
Client comparison (Claude vs. ChatGPT vs. Mistral).All three clients executed
the five tools in the manual protocol above, including tool chaining where applicable.
Claude exposes resources and prompts natively and also works withResourcesAsTools;
ChatGPT and Mistral rely onResourcesAsTools and PromptsAsTools for non-tool
primitives. Claude and ChatGPT sync one connector registration across Desktop, Web,
and Mobile; Mistral remains Web/Mobile-only (Beta) and occasionally drops sessions
until re-authentication.
5.10.5 Non-Compatible Clients
As of February 2026, two major AI platforms donot support MCP remote connectors
for end users:
• Google Gemini: The consumer web and mobile apps do not support MCP
connectors. The Gemini CLI supports local MCP servers viasettings.json, but
remote URL-based servers are not yet implemented [40]. Enterprise MCP is available
via Google Cloud.
• Microsoft Copilot: The consumer chat interface does not support MCP. MCP
integration is available exclusively in Copilot Studio [41], an enterprise development
platform.
72
5.10 Compatibility Analysis Imre Obermüller
Figure 5.12:Mistral Le Chat executing a search tool call against the LeoWiki MCP
server.
73
5.10 Compatibility Analysis Imre Obermüller
VS Code supports MCP servers through extensions (Cline, Continue) as well as through
GitHub Copilot Agent mode, configured via a localmcp.json file. GitHub Copilot
is particularly relevant for the HTL target audience, as it is available at no cost to
students through GitHub Education [42]. However, VS Code extensions configure MCP
servers via local files rather than the remote OAuth 2.1 flow used by the LeoWiki
server, and were therefore not tested in the scope of this project. LM Studio follows
the same local-only pattern. Cursor IDE has documented issues with remote MCP
authentication, including a startup race condition where tools register before the OAuth
flow completes [43, 44].
5.10.6 Market Context
According to Similarweb data (January 2026), ChatGPT holds approximately 64%
of global AI chatbot web traffic, down from 87% one year prior [45]. Google Gemini
captured 21.5%, with the remainder shared among Grok, Claude, Perplexity, DeepSeek,
and Copilot. At the time of testing (February 2026), the three compatible clients
represented a substantial share of consumer AI chatbot traffic [45].
Compatibility principle. In general, any AI client that implements the Anthropic
MCP specification [3] fully—including HTTP Streamable transport and OAuth 2.1—
is compatible with the LeoWiki MCP server without modifications. These findings
reflect the state as of February 2026 and are subject to change as vendors update their
implementations.
5.10.7 Compatibility Matrix
Figure 5.13 provides a visual overview of feature support across all tested clients.
Table 5.7 consolidates the findings in detail.
Table 5.7 consolidates the findings. Each cell indicates full support (✓), partial (∼), or
no support (×).
5.10.8 Key Findings
1. All three compatible clients returned successful tool calls in the manual tests via
the remote URL, confirming the core MCP tool-calling mechanism [3].
74
5.10 Compatibility Analysis Imre Obermüller
Figure 5.13:MCP client compatibility matrix (February 2026). Three of five tested AI
clients (Claude, ChatGPT, Mistral) fully support remote HTTP Streamable
connections with OAuth 2.1 authentication. Google Gemini and Microsoft
Copilot (consumer chat) lack consumer-facing remote MCP connector
support. Partial entries for resource access and prompt templates are
bridged by FastMCP 3.0 transforms.
75
5.11 MCP Server Testing Imre Obermüller
Table 5.7: MCP client compatibility matrix (February 2026).
Feature Claude ChatGPT Mistral Gemini MS Copilot
Remote URL connect ✓ ✓ ✓ × ×
OAuth 2.1 flow ✓ ✓ ✓ — —
Tool invocation ✓ ✓ ✓ — —
Resource access ✓ ∼ ∼ — —
Prompt templates ✓ × × — —
Transforms fallback ✓ ✓ ✓ — —
Desktop app ✓ ✓ × — —
Mobile app ✓ ✓ ✓ — —
Cross-platform sync ✓ ✓ × — —
Paid plan required Yes Yes No (Beta) — —
2. OAuth 2.1 via Scalekit authenticated users across all three clients using the same
flow: email redirect→ one-time code→ connected.
3. The ResourcesAsTools and PromptsAsTools transforms provide access to all server
functionality from clients that only support tools.
4. Clients connect by entering only the server URL; no local software installation is
required.
5. Claude and ChatGPT synchronize the connector registration across Desktop, Web,
and Mobile platforms.
6. The RBAC filtering operates at the server level; clients receive role-appropriate
results without requiring client-side configuration (see Appendix .5.3).
These observations address research question FF2 (operationalized as I5 in this chapter):
MCP proved workable as a standardized integration interface for the tested clients.
The limitations identified – fragmented advanced feature support, rapid specification
evolution – are noted in Section 7.2.
5.11 MCP Server Testing
5.11.1 Unit Tests
The test suite comprises 22 files undertests/ with approximately 100 top-leveltest_*
functions; pytest collects additional cases from parametrized tests (e.g., RBAC matrices).
Deterministic tests (test_tools_deterministic.py, test_rbac_deterministic.py)
validate tool registration and schema correctness, middleware chain ordering, RBAC
76
5.11 MCP Server Testing Imre Obermüller
permission matrix (all role-tool combinations), and configuration loading via Pydantic
Settings. These tests run without external dependencies (no Qdrant, no OpenAI API
key) and form the CI gate.
5.11.2 Integration Tests
End-to-end tests ( test_server_endpoints.py, test_mcp_http_streamable.py,
test_mcp_endpoint_direct.py) verify the full request lifecycle: HTTP endpoint
responses, MCP protocol negotiation over HTTP Streamable, OAuth 2.1 flow endpoints,
tool invocation with RBAC filtering, resource and prompt access, and query logging
persistence and format validation.
5.11.3 Continuous Integration Pipeline
A GitHub Actions workflow (.github/workflows/ci.yml) runs on every push tomain
and feature/* branches:
1. Lint with ruff≥0.1.0 (Python 3.13, ignoring line length and unused imports).
2. Type checkwith mypy≥1.5.0 (–ignore-missing-imports).
3. Deterministic testsvia pytest (gate: must pass).
4. Remaining testsvia pytest (non-blocking, requires live services).
5. Docker buildverification (builds the production image onubuntu-latest).
5.11.4 Transport Verification
The transport comparison (Section 5.3.4) serves as a practical verification of both trans-
port implementations. The HTTP Streamable transport was validated through produc-
tion deployment on the Raspberry Pi with real client connections. Thestdio transport
was validated through local development with Claude Desktop. Dedicated test files
(test_mcp_sse_correct.py, test_http_mode.py, test_stdio_with_new_data.py)
provide automated verification.
5.11.5 Security Verification
Security-related tests (test_jwt_validation.py, test_docker_readiness.py) verify:
error masking (internal details not exposed to clients), JWT token validation edge cases
(expired, malformed, wrong audience), rate limiting (HTTP 429 returned when per-IP
77
5.11 MCP Server Testing Imre Obermüller
limitexceeded), requestsizelimits(HTTP413foroversizedpayloads), andRBACbypass
attempts (unauthorized tool invocations correctly rejected withToolError).
78
6 Embedding, Retrieval,
Authentication and Deployment
6.1 Embedding Model Evaluation
Note on sub-question labels: The labels J1–J8 used in this chapter follow the final
research question specification (finalized 2026-02-11) and differ from the preliminary
numbering in the ABA document (Appendix .1).
6.1.1 Test Corpus Construction
The choice of embedding model determines retrieval quality: it governs how accurately
content is represented as vectors and therefore bounds achievable ranking performance.
Research question FF3 formulates this requirement explicitly:Which embedding model
achieves the best retrieval quality for German-language wiki content?
The following requirements were placed on the embedding model:
1. German-language retrieval quality:The model must accurately map German
texts – including technical terminology, compound words, and school-specific
vocabulary – into vector representations.
2. Local executability:For data privacy reasons (school-internal content), a locally
runnable model is preferred (cf. Section 3.4).
3. Hardware compatibility: The model must be executable on an NVIDIA
GeForce RTX 4080 Laptop GPU (12 GB VRAM).
4. Reproducibility: All evaluation results must be reproducible with documented
configurations (NFR-3).
The Massive Text Embedding Benchmark (MTEB) was used for pre-selection of suitable
models [12]. MTEB provides standardized benchmarks for embedding models and has
included German-language retrieval tasks (RTEB-deu) since 2024. The leaderboard
was retrieved on February 16, 2026 and served as the primary selection heuristic.
79
6.1 Embedding Model Evaluation Jan Ritt
Four local models from different providers were selected from the upper ranks of the
MTEB RTEB(deu) leaderboard. Additionally, OpenAI’stext-embedding-3-large
was included as a commercial reference model to establish a performance ceiling. The
model BAAI/bge-m3-unsupervised (MTEB rank #12), used as default in RAGFlow,
was integrated as a baseline to determine whether the RAGFlow default configuration
can be surpassed.
Table 6.1: Overview of evaluated embedding models with MTEB rank (RTEB-deu),
parameter count, and vector dimensions.
Model Provider Rank Score Params Dim.
Octen-Embedding-4B [46] Octen #2 73.25 4.0B 2560
PIXIE-Rune-v1.0 [47] TelePIX #3 69.81 0.568B 1024
snowflake-arctic-embed-l-v2.0 [48] Snowflake #7 65.48 0.568B 1024
bge-m3-unsupervised [11] BAAI #12 60.24 0.568B 1024
text-embedding-3-large [10] OpenAI – – API 3072
The benchmark used the fully preprocessed LeoWiki corpus. This corpus comprises
436 Markdown files derived from the 196 wiki pages and associated media documents
available as of February 2026. The production pipeline processes 516 input documents in
total (196 pages and 320 media references; cf. Table 6.9); of these, 436 yield text content
suitable for embedding after preprocessing. The 436 documents were segmented into
10,841 text chunks (paragraph-based, maximum chunk size 512 tokens, no minimum
length filter). The content is predominantly German with occasional English technical
terms.
The ground truth consisted of 78 question-answer pairs generated with
Claude Opus 4.6 [49]4 and manually verified by both authors against the wiki content.
Both authors independently reviewed all 78 question–answer pairs. Initial disagreements
arose in 7 cases (9%), primarily concerning difficulty classification and edge-case answer
derivability. These were resolved through discussion and re-examination of the source
material. Each pair was checked for: (1) source page existence in the corpus, (2) answer
derivability from the referenced page, and (3) question clarity and unambiguity. Of the
initially generated 95 candidate pairs, 12 were discarded for factual errors or ambiguous
source attribution, and 5 additional pairs were removed because they could not be
4“Claude Opus 4.6” is the model identifier displayed by the Cursor IDE (version 0.46.x, accessed
2026-02-17). Cursor relays requests to Anthropic’s API; the closest public API identifier at that date
was claude-opus-4-5-20250620. Throughout this thesis, the IDE label “Claude Opus 4.6” is used
because it is the identifier recorded in the ground-truth JSON file (leowiki_qa_78_Opus_46.json),
ensuring reproducibility.
80
6.1 Embedding Model Evaluation Jan Ritt
sufficiently clarified despite modification attempts, yielding the final 78-pair dataset
(78 = 95− 12− 5). The difficulty distribution comprises 17 easy, 40 medium, and
21 hard questions. Easy questions target answers contained in a single, clearly identifi-
able paragraph. Medium questions require combining information from one wiki page
or recognizing domain-specific terminology. Hard questions require cross-namespace rea-
soning or involve ambiguous terms with multiple possible interpretations. Both authors
independently assigned difficulty levels; disagreements were resolved by discussion. The
questions span 12 of the wiki’s 23 namespaces (the remaining 11 contain administrative
configuration, empty placeholders, or restricted content not accessible to students) and
various document types (wiki pages, PDF, DOCX, XLSX, PPTX). All questions were
formulated in German to match the target language of the wiki system.
6.1.2 Evaluation Metrics
The primary evaluation metrics are MRR (Mean Reciprocal Rank) and NDCG@10
(Normalized Discounted Cumulative Gain at rank 10), as these most precisely capture
ranking quality – i.e., the placement of the relevant document in the result list [50, 2].
Additionally, Precision@5 (P@5), Recall@10, and Hit Rate (proportion of queries with
at least one hit in the top 10) were measured.
• MRR (Mean Reciprocal Rank):The reciprocal of the rank of the first relevant
hit, averaged over all queries. An MRR of 1.0 means the relevant document is
always at position 1.
• NDCG@10: Evaluates the entire ranking of the top-10 results, applying loga-
rithmic discounting for lower positions.
• Precision@5 (P@5): Proportion of relevant documents among the five highest-
ranked results.
• Recall@10: Proportion of all retrievable relevant documents found in the top 10.
• Hit Rate: Binary metric – proportion of queries for which at least one relevant
document appears in the top 10.
Model comparison used the scripteval_model_comparison.py. A separate Qdrant
collectionwascreatedpermodel(differentvectordimensionsrequireseparatecollections).
Models were loaded sequentially and explicitly unloaded from GPU memory after
embedding generation to avoid VRAM conflicts. Retrieval was performed via Dense
81
6.1 Embedding Model Evaluation Jan Ritt
Cosine Similarity withtop_k=10. The hardware consisted of an NVIDIA RTX 4080
Laptop GPU (12 GB VRAM), an AMD Ryzen 9 processor, and 32 GB RAM.
6.1.3 Model Comparison Results
Table 6.2 shows the aggregated retrieval metrics of all five models (MRR, NDCG@10,
P@5, Recall@10, Hit Rate). The same full metric set is tabulated in Appendix .6
(Table 11) for reference.
Table 6.2:Aggregated retrieval metrics of the five evaluated embedding models on the
LeoWiki corpus (78 ground-truth questions, 10,841 chunks, Dense Cosine
Similarity, top_k=10).
Model MRR NDCG@10 P@5 Recall@10 Hit Rate
Octen-Embedding-4B 0.883 0.899 0.185 0.949 94.9%
text-embedding-3-large 0.872 0.897 0.192 0.974 97.4%
PIXIE-Rune-v1.0 0.802 0.823 0.177 0.885 88.5%
snowflake-arctic-embed-l-v2.0 0.788 0.822 0.182 0.923 92.3%
bge-m3-unsupervised 0.756 0.800 0.182 0.936 93.6%
Figure 6.1 visualizes the MRR and NDCG@10 scores, highlighting the two-tier struc-
ture.
Figure 6.1:Aggregated retrieval metrics (MRR, NDCG@10, Hit Rate) of five embedding
models on the LeoWiki corpus (78 queries). The dashed line at 0.87 marks
the Tier 1 threshold; Tier 1 models are shaded in blue.
82
6.1 Embedding Model Evaluation Jan Ritt
Two-tier structure. The results show a distinct two-tier structure in model perfor-
mance:
Tier 1 (MRR > 0.87):Octen-Embedding-4B (MRR 0.883; NDCG@10 0.899) and
text-embedding-3-large (MRR 0.872; NDCG@10 0.897) form the top group. The gap
between these two models is small (1.1 percentage points MRR).
Tier 2 (MRR 0.75–0.80): PIXIE-Rune-v1.0, snowflake-arctic-embed-l-v2.0, and
bge-m3-unsupervised cluster in the 0.756 to 0.802 MRR range. The gap to the top
group amounts to 8 to 13 percentage points and is thus substantial. These three models
each have approximately 568 million parameters; their performance differences among
each other fall within the range of statistical noise for a sample of 78 questions.
Results by difficulty level. Breaking down results by difficulty shows where models
differ most.
Easy questions (n=17):Octen-Embedding-4B is the only local model achieving a
100% hit rate (MRR 0.840). OpenAI scores slightly higher with MRR 0.873 but misses
one question (hit rate 94.1%).
Medium questions (n=40):On this largest question group, Octen-Embedding-4B
dominates with MRR 0.916 versus OpenAI’s 0.856 – a lead of 6 percentage points.
For typical everyday wiki queries, the local model delivers more precise first-position
placement.
Hard questions (n=21):Here, OpenAI takes the lead with MRR 0.900 and a 100%
hit rate. Octen-Embedding-4B drops to MRR 0.857 and 90.5% hit rate. The API-
backed model handles ambiguous or cross-namespace queries more robustly. Figure 6.2
visualizes MRR and hit rate by difficulty level across all five models.
Embedding speed. The processing time for 10,841 chunks varies considerably between
models (cf. Table 6.3).
Octen-Embedding-4B requires approximately 36 minutes – roughly 20 times longer
than the 568M-parameter models. For one-time or periodic corpus indexing, this
duration is acceptable. OpenAI’s API costs amount to $0.15 for the evaluation corpus
(1.18 million tokens across 10,841 chunks), which is economically negligible. The
production embedding run uses fewer chunks (6,002) and costs $0.14 (cf. Table 6.9).
83
6.1 Embedding Model Evaluation Jan Ritt
Figure 6.2:Retrieval metrics by question difficulty (easy / medium / hard) for the five
evaluated embedding models. Tier-1 models (Octen-4B, OpenAI) maintain
higher MRR across all difficulty levels.
Table 6.3: Embedding speed and cost per complete indexing of the LeoWiki corpus
(10,841 chunks, NVIDIA RTX 4080 Laptop GPU).
Model Time Throughput Cost
bge-m3-unsupervised 104.6s ( ∼1.7min) ∼104ch/s free
PIXIE-Rune-v1.0 107.3s ( ∼1.8min) ∼101ch/s free
snowflake-arctic-embed-l-v2.0 109.4s ( ∼1.8min) ∼99ch/s free
text-embedding-3-large 179.1s ( ∼3.0min) ∼61ch/s $0.15
Octen-Embedding-4B 2186.3s ( ∼36.4min) ∼5ch/s free
84
6.1 Embedding Model Evaluation Jan Ritt
Figure 6.3:Multi-metric comparison of the five embedding models across MRR,
NDCG@10, P@5, Recall@10, and Hit Rate. Tier-1 models (Octen-4B,
OpenAI) occupy more area in all retrieval-quality dimensions.
85
6.1 Embedding Model Evaluation Jan Ritt
MTEB correlation. The ranking order of the MTEB RTEB(deu) leaderboard cor-
relates with the observed performance on the LeoWiki corpus. The highest-ranked
model (Octen-Embedding-4B, MTEB #2) also achieves the highest MRR, while the
leaderboard order of the 568M models (PIXIE #3 > Snowflake #7 > bge-m3 #12)
is reflected in the measurement results, albeit with smaller margins. This supports
the MTEB leaderboard as a useful selection heuristic for German-language retrieval
tasks.
RAGFlow baseline. The model bge-m3-unsupervised, used as default in RAGFlow,
achieved the lowest MRR (0.756) among all evaluated models. All four other models
surpass this baseline, with Octen-Embedding-4B achieving an improvement of 12.8 per-
centage points. This indicates that the RAGFlow default configuration can be improved
for domain-specific use cases by selecting a higher-quality embedding model.
Figure 6.4:Per-query MRR distribution for each model (78 questions). The wide boxes
reflect the heterogeneous nature of the LeoWiki corpus across different
namespaces and difficulty levels.
Statistical analysis. All models exhibit relatively high standard deviations in MRR
(0.28–0.36), reflecting the heterogeneous nature of the LeoWiki corpus across different
namespaces and difficulty levels. To quantify uncertainty and test whether observed
rank differences are systematic, 95% bootstrap confidence intervals (1000 resamples,
86
6.1 Embedding Model Evaluation Jan Ritt
fixed seed for reproducibility) and pairwise Wilcoxon signed-rank tests were computed
for all model pairs.
Bootstrap 95% CIs for MRR ( n = 78 ): Octen-Embedding-4B:
0.883 [0.819, 0.942]; text-embedding-3-large: 0.872 [0.802, 0.927]; PIXIE-Rune-v1.0:
0.802 [0.712, 0.884]; snowflake-arctic-embed-l-v2.0: 0.788 [0.708, 0.864]; bge-m3-
unsupervised: 0.756 [0.675, 0.836].
Tier separation (Tier 1 vs. Tier 2): The performance gap between the two
tiers is statistically significant. Octen-Embedding-4B vs. bge-m3-unsupervised:p =
0.0009, Cohen’sd = 0.39 (small to medium effect); text-embedding-3-large vs. bge-
m3-unsupervised: p = 0.0018, Cohen’sd = 0.36 (small to medium effect). The Tier 2
models (PIXIE, Snowflake, bge-m3) are not significantly different from each other on
any metric (p> 0.20, d< 0.22).
Within Tier 1 (Octen-4B vs. OpenAI):The 1.1-percentage-point MRR difference
between the two top models is not statistically significant (p = 0.698, Cohen’sd = 0.04,
negligible effect). The production deployment oftext-embedding-3-large over Octen-
Embedding-4B is therefore not associated with a measurable retrieval quality loss.
6.1.4 Model Selection Rationale
The trade-off analysis between the three relevant model categories is summarized in
Table 6.4.
Table 6.4: Trade-off analysis of the three model categories regarding quality, resource
requirements, and data privacy (research question FF3, operationalized as
sub-question J2).
Criterion Octen-4B OpenAI 3-large 568M Models
Quality (MRR) Best (0.883) Close second (0.872) 0.76–0.80
Recall@10 Very good (0.949) Best (0.974) 0.88–0.94
Model size 4.0B / 7.7GB VRAM API 568M / 2.2GB VRAM
Throughput ∼5ch/s ∼61ch/s ∼100ch/s
Cost Free (local) $0.15 per corpus Free (local)
Data privacy Full (local) Data sent to OpenAI Full (local)
Robustness (hard) Good (90.5% hit) Excellent (100% hit) 82–95% hit
For productive use in the LeoWiki context,Octen-Embedding-4B is recommended
as the primary model: it offers the best ranking quality, is free to use, and does not
require transferring school-internal data to external services. The slow embedding
87
6.2 Chunking Strategy Jan Ritt
speed is acceptable for batch operation (one-time or periodic re-indexing). The VRAM
requirement of 7.7 GB in float16 fits the available RTX 4080 with 12 GB.
For resource-constrained environments (less than 8 GB VRAM),snowflake-arctic-
embed-l-v2.0 offers the best balance of performance (MRR 0.788; Recall 0.923) and
resource efficiency (2.2 GB VRAM, ~100 chunks/s).
OpenAI text-embedding-3-large involves an external API dependency and per-
usage cost, which introduces a data privacy consideration in the school context. The
deployment trade-off is discussed in the paragraph below.
Deployment decision: Octen-4B vs. OpenAI in production.The recommendation of
Octen-Embedding-4B as the highest-quality model assumes a GPU with at least 7.7 GB
VRAM is available for batch indexing. The deployment target – a Raspberry Pi 5 with
8 GB RAM and no dedicated GPU – cannot execute the 4B-parameter model locally.
For production operation,OpenAI text-embedding-3-large is therefore used as
the embedding model (cf. Section 4.3.3). The quality difference between Octen-4B
(MRR 0.883) and OpenAI (MRR 0.872) amounts to only 1.1 percentage points and is
not statistically significant (p = 0.698, Cohen’sd = 0.04). At the same time, OpenAI
offers the highest robustness on hard questions (100% hit rate) and requires one-time
costs of $0.14 for complete corpus indexing. This deliberate engineering trade-off –
minimal quality loss against substantial infrastructure simplification – is documented
in detail in the deployment section (Section 6.7).
Table 6.2 summarizes FF3 on the full corpus (10,841 chunks, 78 questions):Octen-
Embedding-4B leads with MRR 0.883 and NDCG@10 0.899, ahead of OpenAI
(MRR 0.872) andthe RAGFlow baselinebge-m3 (MRR0.756). TheMTEB pre-screening
proved useful; models above 1 billion parameters (or API-backed models) cluster above
MRR 0.87, while 568M-parameter models remain near 0.76–0.80. Section 6.2.3 next
isolates chunk-size effects using the same embedding model.
6.2 Chunking Strategy
6.2.1 DokuWiki Syntax Parsing
InRetrieval-AugmentedGenerationsystems, thechunksizedeterminesthetextsegments
into which a document is divided before vectorization. This granularity affects retrieval
88
6.2 Chunking Strategy Jan Ritt
Figure 6.5:Speed–quality trade-off: embedding throughput (chunks/s) vs. MRR for the
five evaluated models. The Raspberry Pi constraint (no dedicated GPU)
eliminates Octen-4B from production use.
89
6.2 Chunking Strategy Jan Ritt
quality in two opposing directions [51]: chunks that are too small lose semantic context
and fragment answers across multiple entries; chunks that are too large dilute the
relevance signal by embedding relevant sentences together with irrelevant paragraphs.
The evaluation addresses this trade-off:What is the impact of chunk size on retrieval
quality?
For segmentation of the LeoWiki corpus, theContentAwareChunker was employed (cf.
Section 4.1), which – unlike naive splitting – considers the document structure. Different
content types, as classified in the Deep Evaluation (Stage 02), are chunked using different
methods. The chunker respects paragraph boundaries and avoids splitting coherent
text blocks. The overlap was fixed at 50 tokens (9.8% of the primary chunk size of
512 tokens) to preserve sentence continuity at chunk boundaries: an overlap too small
loses cross-boundary context, while an overlap too large introduces redundancy and
inflates collection size. The chosen value is treated as a fixed hyperparameter across all
chunk-size experiments; its effect relative to other overlap sizes is not evaluated in this
thesis.
6.2.2 Semantic vs. Fixed-Size Chunking
The ContentAwareChunker selects the chunking method based on the content type
determined during Deep Evaluation:
• Semantic (paragraph-based): Default method for the majority of wiki pages.
Paragraph boundaries serve as natural split points.
• Recursive Header: ForKNOWLEDGE pages with heading structure. The heading
hierarchy determines chunk boundaries.
• Naive: ForNEWS pages without structural markers. Segmentation is performed
purely by token count.
• Metadata Only: For forms and templates (FORM). Only metadata is extracted;
the content is not chunked.
• Skip: For empty pages (EMPTY). These are skipped entirely.
This content-type-dependent strategy adapts segmentation to each document structure:
structured knowledge pages are split along their heading hierarchy, while unstructured
news pages are divided uniformly.
90
6.2 Chunking Strategy Jan Ritt
6.2.3 Chunk Size Optimization
To determine the optimal chunk size, a parametric comparison with three configurations
was conducted. The independent variable was the chunk size (256, 512, 1024 to-
kens). Controlled variables included the embedding model (text-embedding-3-large),
the ground truth (78 Q&A pairs), the overlap (50 tokens), and the chunk-
ing method (ContentAwareChunker). The dependent variables comprised MRR,
NDCG@10, P@5, and Hit Rate. The embedding model was deliberately fixed at
text-embedding-3-large to isolate the influence of chunk size. Relevance assessment
was performed via multi-signal scoring: for each retrieved chunk, three signals were
computed—word-overlap ratio between the chunk and the ground-truth answer, keyword
match count against the query terms, and substring fragment match. A chunk was
marked relevant if at least one signal indicated a match, i.e., the scoring uses disjunctive
(OR) combination to minimize false negatives in the ground-truth evaluation. A separate
Qdrant collection was created per configuration (ephemeral, in-memory).
Table 6.5 shows the aggregated metrics for the three chunk sizes.
Table 6.5: Aggregated retrieval metrics by chunk size.
Chunk Size Chunks MRR NDCG@10 P@5 Hit Rate
256 tokens 21,051 0.8309 0.8626 0.1872 96.2%
512 tokens 10,841 0.8760 0.903 0.195 98.7%
1024 tokens 5,481 0.8609 0.8924 0.1949 98.7%
The 512-token configuration achieves the highest MRR (0.8760) and NDCG@10 (0.903),
surpassing both the smaller and larger variants. Differentiation by difficulty level
deepens this picture (cf. Table 6.6).
Table 6.6: Retrieval metrics by chunk size and difficulty level.
Chunk Size Easy MRR Easy Hit Med. MRR Med. Hit Hard MRR Hard Hit
256 tok. 0.740 94.1% 0.859 97.5% 0.851 95.2%
512 tok. 0.892 100% 0.856 97.5% 0.900 100%
1024 tok. 0.814 100% 0.884 97.5% 0.855 100%
On easy questions, 256-token chunks achieve only MRR 0.740 – a decline of 15.2 percent-
age points compared to 512 tokens. The cause lies in fragmentation: answers spanning
multiple paragraphs are split across multiple entries with small chunks, so no single
chunk contains the complete answer and the top-k window misses relevant context.
91
6.2 Chunking Strategy Jan Ritt
For hard questions, 512 tokens achieves the highest MRR (0.900) and the only perfect
hit rate (100%). The 512-token window captures sufficient context even for questions
requiring cross-paragraph understanding.
The results show a concave pattern (256< 512> 1024): a medium chunk size provides
the optimal balance between context preservation and focused relevance, consistent with
trade-offs documented in RAG practitioner guides [51]. From 512 tokens onward, the hit
rate stabilizes at 98.7% (77 of 78 questions find at least one relevant chunk in the top 10).
Only at 256 tokens does the hit rate drop to 96.2% (75/78), suggesting that very small
chunks occasionally provide insufficient context for relevance assessment.
The evaluation is subject to the following limitations: only three chunk sizes were tested;
intermediate values (e.g., 384 tokens) might reveal different optima. An alternative
approach, late chunking [52], avoids context loss by applying chunking after the full-
context embedding pass rather than before; this was not evaluated because it requires
long-context embedding models that exceed the Raspberry Pi’s memory constraints. The
overlap was fixed at 50 tokens, resulting in varying overlap rates for different chunk sizes
(19.5% at 256; 9.8% at 512; 4.9% at 1024). Only one embedding model was used; other
models might perform optimally at different chunk sizes. TheContentAwareChunker
respects paragraph boundaries – with naive splitting, results might differ.
The MRR value of 0.8760 reported here differs slightly from the 0.872 for
text-embedding-3-large in the model comparison (Section 6.1), because each ex-
periment indexed a separate Qdrant collection; the 0.4-percentage-point difference is
within expected run-to-run variation for a sample of 78 questions. The observed concave
pattern confirms the trade-off between context loss with too-small chunks and relevance
dilution with too-large chunks. Figure 6.6 visualizes the complete parametric study
including this pattern and the performance breakdown by question difficulty.
Statistical context. Bootstrap 95% CIs for MRR ( n = 78 , 1000 resamples):
512 tokens: 0.876 [0.816, 0.934]; 1024 tokens: 0.861 [0.799, 0.917]; 256 tokens:
0.831 [0.754, 0.899]. Pairwise Wilcoxon tests yield p > 0.06 for all three pairings
(512 vs. 256: p = 0.076; 512 vs. 1024: p = 0.555; 256 vs. 1024: p = 0.195), with
negligible Cohen’sd values (< 0.19). The differences are therefore not statistically sig-
nificant atα = 0.05. The 512-token recommendation rests on the consistent directional
advantage across all three metrics and both extreme difficulty levels rather than on a
single significant pairwise test.
92
6.2 Chunking Strategy Jan Ritt
Figure 6.6:Chunk size parametric study on the LeoWiki corpus (model: text-embedding-
3-large, 78 queries). MRR, NDCG@10, and Hit Rate are shown for 256,
512, and 1024 tokens with performance breakdown by question difficulty.
93
6.3 Qdrant Implementation Jan Ritt
6.2.4 Metadata Extraction
The ContentAwareChunker extracts metadata during segmentation, which is later
stored as Qdrant payload (cf. Section 6.3.1). The extracted fields include the page
title, DokuWiki namespace, page ID, content type from Deep Evaluation, access level
(public or teacher_only), freshness score, as well as outgoing links and incoming
backlinks. The chunk position (index and total count) is also captured to enable
context reconstruction within the original document during result presentation. All
metadata is stored as a flat object without nesting, which simplifies subsequent filtering
in Qdrant.
6.3 Qdrant Implementation
6.3.1 Collection Schema Design
Research question J5 addresses the collection schema and payload structure of the vector
database: What collection schema and payload structure is used in the vector database?
The schema serves as the interface between the embedding pipeline (Stage 04), Qdrant,
and the MCP server, and must support filtering, re-ranking, and result display.
The embedding pipeline produces a JSONL file whose lines can be uploaded directly
into Qdrant. Each record consists of four top-level fields (cf. Table 6.7).
Table 6.7: Record schema of the embedding pipeline.
Field Type Description
id string Unique chunk identifier (format:
{collection}_{file_stem}_{chunk_index})
text string Chunk plain text for result display
embedding float[3072] Dense vector ( text-embedding-3-large)
metadata object Flat metadata object (= Qdrant payload)
This four-field structure was chosen for three reasons: (1) MCP compatibility – the
MCP server expects exactly these fields and requires no mapping during deployment;
(2) direct Qdrant mapping –id becomes the point ID,embedding becomes the vector,
metadata becomes the payload; (3) simplicity – all metadata is flat (no nesting), so
Qdrant filters can operate directly on it.
The metadata object comprises 17 fields covering various aspects of chunk provenance,
content, and retrieval optimization (cf. Table 6.8).
94
6.3 Qdrant Implementation Jan Ritt
Table 6.8: Metadata fields of the Qdrant payload.
Field Type Purpose
source string Original URL for source attribution
collection string pages / media – distinction between pages and media
title string Document title from preprocessing
namespace string DokuWiki namespace (hierarchical, e.g.,archive:exams)
page_id string DokuWiki page ID (pages only)
access_level string public / teacher_only – RBAC filtering (J7)
content_type string Content type from Deep Evaluation (KNOWLEDGE, NEWS,
PORTAL, ...)
freshness_score float 6-level freshness (0...1) for re-ranking
freshness_category string Human-readable freshness category
chunk_index int Position of the chunk within the document
total_chunks int Total number of chunks in the document
original_length int Character length of the original document
embedding_model string Model used (reproducibility)
embedding_dimensions int Vector dimension (reproducibility)
created_at string Timestamp of embedding creation
links_to string[] Outgoing DokuWiki links (graph retrieval)
linked_from string[] Incoming backlinks (graph retrieval)
6.3.2 Index Configuration
The Qdrant collection uses cosine distance for the 3,072-dimensional vector. Based on
the retrieval optimization evaluation in Section 6.4, only the dense vector is stored in
the production schema. Hybrid search showed no quality advantage for the LeoWiki
corpus. Should hybrid search be desired in the future, Qdrant can generate the BM25
index at runtime from thetext field.
Payload indexes are created for the five most frequent filter patterns:
• access_level (keyword) – RBAC filter
• collection (keyword) – pages vs. media
• namespace (keyword) – namespace restriction
• content_type (keyword) – content type filter
• freshness_score (float) – re-ranking
These indexes ensure that the most frequent MCP query patterns (role-based search,
namespace restriction, content type filtering) can be executed without a full scan.
95
6.3 Qdrant Implementation Jan Ritt
6.3.3 Payload Filtering
The flat metadata object enables direct Qdrant filter expressions without cumber-
some path syntax. Nested structures would complicate indexing. The flat structure
allows filter expressions such as access_level == "teacher_only" or namespace
starts_with "departm".
The access_level field is derived from DokuWiki namespace ACLs (Stage 03 Pre-
processing) and enables server-side RBAC filtering without lookups (cf. research ques-
tion J7). The current values arepublic and teacher_only, extensible for additional
roles.
The fieldslinks_to and linked_from enable graph-based retrieval (“see also...” rec-
ommendations) and can serve as additional relevance signals. Backlinks indicate which
pages reference a chunk – an indicator of its importance in the wiki context.
In a school wiki with academic-year-specific content (timetables, schedules, exam lists),
many pages are semantically relevant but outdated in content. Thefreshness_score
(numeric, 0...1) allows weighted re-ranking, whilefreshness_category enables human-
readable filters in MCP tools.
6.3.4 Batch Ingestion Pipeline
The first production embedding run (Stage 04) produced the metrics shown in Ta-
ble 6.9.
Table 6.9: Metrics of the first production embedding run (Stage 04).
Metric Value
Documents 516 (196 pages, 320 media)
Chunks 6,002 (962 pages, 5,040 media)
Embedding model text-embedding-3-large
Dimensions 3,072
Tokens consumed 1,093,298
API cost $0.14
Runtime 610.6s ( ≈10min)
Note: The evaluation corpus used for the model comparison (Section 6.1.3) comprises
10,841 chunks produced by segmenting all 436 preprocessed documents with a maximum
chunk size of 512 tokens and a chunk overlap of 50 tokens, with no minimum content
filter. The production embedding run shown above produced 6,002 chunks because it
96
6.4 Retrieval Optimization Jan Ritt
applied a minimum chunk length of 200 characters (discarding very short fragments)
and a larger overlap of 150 characters. Content-type-aware chunking strategies (e.g.,
table-row extraction for structured pages, header-based splitting for knowledge articles)
further reduce the final count relative to the evaluation corpus.
The Qdrant collection schema uses a deliberately simple design: four top-level fields
(id, text, embedding, metadata) with flat metadata for maximum compatibility with
Qdrant filters and the MCP server.
6.4 Retrieval Optimization
6.4.1 Dense Retrieval Baseline
This section investigates whether hybrid retrieval – combining dense vector search
and keyword-based BM25 search – offers advantages over pure vector search. Hy-
brid approaches are considered promising in the literature, particularly for corpora
with rare technical terms or proper nouns, where semantic embeddings alone may be
insufficient [11, 53].
The pure vector search serves as the dense retrieval baseline: the query is embedded
with the same model as the corpus and matched against the stored vectors via cosine
similarity. The search is performed via Qdrant’squery_points() on the named vector
"dense".
Both search modes were evaluated on identical data: embedding model
text-embedding-3-large (3,072 dimensions), chunk size 512 tokens (optimal per
Section 6.2.3), 10,841 chunks, 78 ground-truth questions,top_k=10. The Qdrant col-
lection contained both dense and sparse vectors, so both modes operate on the same
data.
6.4.2 Hybrid Search Implementation
In addition to vector search, a BM25-based sparse search was implemented. The results
of both search modes are merged using Reciprocal Rank Fusion (RRF) [54] within
Qdrant. The implementation uses twoPrefetch queries (dense and sparse), which are
fused viaFusionQuery(fusion=Fusion.RRF).
97
6.4 Retrieval Optimization Jan Ritt
The BM25 component was implemented with a custom Python tokenizer that removes
German stopwords (170 stopwords). The BM25 parameters were set to the classical
values proposed by Robertson and Zaragoza [55] (k1 = 1.5;b = 0.75). The corpus vocab-
ulary comprises 28,858 unique terms with an average document length of 33.1 tokens.
The sparse vectors are stored asSparseVector(indices, values) with IDF-weighted
BM25 scores in Qdrant.
6.4.3 Retrieval Strategy Comparison
Table 6.10 shows the direct comparison of both search modes.
Table 6.10: Comparison of Dense Search vs. Hybrid Search (78 queries, top_k=10).
Mode MRR σMRR NDCG@10 σNDCG P@5 Hit Rate
Dense 0.872 0.279 0.898 0.233 0.192 97.4%
Hybrid (BM25+RRF) 0.811 0.309 0.849 0.261 0.190 96.2%
Dense search outperforms hybrid search in all measured metrics. The minor NDCG@10
difference between Table 6.10 (0.898) and Table 6.2 (0.897) results from separate Qdrant
collections used in each experiment; the 0.001 deviation is within expected run-to-run
variation (cf. Section 6.2.3). The differences are summarized in Table 6.11.
Table 6.11: Metric differences between dense and hybrid search.
Metric Delta Direction
MRR −0.0625 Dense better
NDCG@10 −0.0496 Dense better
P@5 −0.0026 Dense better
Hit Rate −1.3 pp Dense better
σMRR +0.030 Dense more consistent
Dense search achieved 76 of 78 hits (2 misses), while hybrid search reached only
75 of 78 hits (3 misses). The hybrid search introduced an additional miss without
compensating for any of the dense search misses.
The Dense MRR of 0.872 in this table corresponds to the value from the model
comparison (Section 6.1.3). The standalone experiment table (Table 15 in Appendix .6)
reports 0.8733 from the dedicated hybrid experiment’s separate Qdrant collection; the
0.1-percentage-point difference is within expected run-to-run variation, analogous to
the chunk-size MRR variation noted in Section 6.2.3.
98
6.4 Retrieval Optimization Jan Ritt
6.4.4 Relevance Tuning
The superiority of pure vector search can be attributed to several factors:
Redundancy of lexical signals. The embedding model text-embedding-3-large
was trained on extensive multilingual data and captures both semantic and lexical
relationships. The additional BM25 component therefore provides predominantly
redundant – and occasionally conflicting – signals.
Small corpus size. With 10,841 chunks from a single school wiki, the vocabulary is
narrow and repetitive. BM25 typically excels on large, heterogeneous corpora where
exact keyword matching disambiguates between semantically similar but topically
different documents [55]. The domain homogeneity of the LeoWiki corpus renders this
disambiguation unnecessary.
German compound words. The German language forms compounds such as “Noten-
staffelung” (grade scale) or “Maturaarbeit” (diploma work), which are not correctly
resolved by simple whitespace tokenization. The BM25 tokenizer cannot match query
terms against these compounds, while the neural embedding model processes them via
subword tokenization.
Noise from RRF fusion. Reciprocal Rank Fusion weights both ranked lists equally.
When BM25 ranks irrelevant documents highly due to purely lexical matches, these are
elevated in the fused ranking and displace genuinely relevant results.
Increased variance and statistical significance. The standard deviation of MRR
rises from 0.279 (dense) to 0.309 (hybrid), indicating lower consistency. A pairwise
Wilcoxon signed-rank test confirms that dense search significantly outperforms hybrid
on MRR (p = 0.042, Cohen’s d =−0.21, small effect) and NDCG@10 (p = 0.042,
Cohen’s d =−0.20, small effect). The difference in Precision@10 is not significant (p =
0.564). Bootstrap 95% CIs for MRR: Dense[0.805, 0.932]; Hybrid [0.738, 0.876]. The
CI overlap is partial, consistent with the small but statistically detectable effect.
Limitations. Only one BM25 parameterization (k1 = 1.5;b = 0.75) was evaluated. The
tokenizer uses simple whitespace segmentation without lemmatization or decomposition.
99
6.5 Search Quality Evaluation Jan Ritt
The RRF fusion weights both ranked lists equally; weighted fusion could yield different
results. Only one embedding model was tested; hybrid search might offer advantages
with weaker models.
In the context of all evaluated retrieval methods (cf. Section 6.5), the progression is
shown in Table 6.12.
Table 6.12: Overall comparison of all retrieval methods.
Method MRR Hit Rate
Keyword (full question) 0.0513 5.1%
Keyword (optimal keywords) 0.3654 37.2%
Dense (text-embedding-3-large) 0.872 97.4%
Hybrid (Dense + BM25 RRF) 0.8108 96.2%
The quality improvement from MRR 0.051 to 0.872 over keyword search is achieved
exclusively by dense vector search. The addition of BM25 via the hybrid approach
does not contribute a positive signal. For the LeoWiki corpus, pure vector search with
text-embedding-3-large (MRR 0.872; hit rate 97.4%) delivers better results than
hybrid search with BM25 and Reciprocal Rank Fusion (MRR 0.811; hit rate 96.2%).
The MRR difference of 6.25 percentage points is statistically significant (p = 0.042,
Wilcoxon signed-rank test; small effect, Cohen’sd =−0.21). The production system
therefore employs dense-only search. Figure 6.7 provides a direct visual comparison of
the two retrieval strategies.
6.5 Search Quality Evaluation
6.5.1 Baseline: DokuWiki Keyword Search
Research question FF1 asks: What is the search quality (MRR, Precision@10 for
the keyword baseline; P@5 for the embedding model comparison) of the RAG pipeline
compared to the conventional DokuWiki keyword search?Only if the RAG pipeline
substantially outperforms the existing keyword search is the implementation effort
warranted.
The baseline was the built-in DokuWiki full-text search, accessed via the
core.searchPages XML-RPC method. DokuWiki 2024-02-06b (“Kaos”) implements
an AND-based search: all search terms must appear on a page for it to qualify as a hit.
Additionally, a language-specific stopword list (inc/lang/de/stopwords.txt) filters
100
6.5 Search Quality Evaluation Jan Ritt
Figure 6.7:Dense vector search vs. hybrid search (BM25 + Reciprocal Rank Fusion)
on 78 ground-truth queries. Metrics shown: MRR, NDCG@10, Hit Rate,
and standard deviation.
common German words such as “wie” (how), “viel” (much), “sollte” (should), “bei”
(at), and “ein” (a/an) [56].
This architecture has a significant consequence: natural-language questions, which
typically contain multiple stopwords, frequently yield zero hits with AND logic, since the
stopwords are not indexed and DokuWiki interprets their absence as “not present.”
Two variants were run to estimate the range of DokuWiki search performance:
1. Full question (fullquestion): The unmodified German question from the
ground truth is used as the search query. This represents the realistic user
scenario – a natural-language question is entered into the search field.
2. Optimal keywords(keywords): The context_keywords field from the ground
truth (up to five keywords per question, extracted by Claude 3.5 Sonnet, Anthropic
snapshot claude-3-5-sonnet-20241022, accessed 2026-02-17, and then manually
reviewed during ground-truth verification) serves as the search query. This
represents the best-case scenario for keyword search – an experienced user who
knows exactly the right search terms.
101
6.5 Search Quality Evaluation Jan Ritt
Table 6.13 shows the results of the full-question variant, Table 6.14 the results with
optimal keywords.
Table 6.13: DokuWiki keyword search: full question (78 queries).
Metric Value
MRR 0.0513
Precision@10 0.0103
Hit Rate 5.1% (4/78)
Only 4 of 78 queries returned any hit at all. The vast majority (74/78) produced
no result, as DokuWiki’s AND logic in combination with stopword filtering renders
complete German sentences practically unsearchable.
Table 6.14: DokuWiki keyword search: optimal keywords (78 queries).
Metric Value
MRR 0.3654
Precision@10 0.0744
Hit Rate 37.2% (29/78)
Even with hand-picked optimal keywords, nearly two-thirds of queries fail (49/78).
DokuWiki’s AND logic requires all keywords to appear on a page; specific technical
terms such as “Aufstiegsklausel” (promotion clause) or “Spezialisierung Medizintechnik”
(medical technology specialization) frequently match only partially.
6.5.2 Semantic Search Results
Table 6.15 juxtaposes the DokuWiki baseline with the semantic retrieval results from
Section 6.1.3.
The semantic search with the best-ranked embedding model (Octen-Embedding-4B)
achieves MRR 0.883, a factor of approximately 17.3 over the full-question keyword
baseline (0.051) and a 2.4-fold improvement over optimal keywords (0.365). The
production model (OpenAItext-embedding-3-large, MRR 0.872) achieves a 17.1-
fold improvement – the “17-fold” headline figure used in the Abstract and Chapter 7.1
refers to this production deployment. The hit rate rises from 5.1%/37.2% to 94.9%.
Figure 6.8 shows which queries fail to retrieve a relevant result in the top-10 for the
keyword baseline, illustrating the vocabulary mismatch problem.
102
6.5 Search Quality Evaluation Jan Ritt
Table 6.15: Overall comparison: DokuWiki keyword search vs. semantic search.
Method MRR P@10 a Hit Rate
DokuWiki keyword (full question) 0.0513 0.0103 5.1%
DokuWiki keyword (optimal keywords) 0.3654 0.0744 37.2%
Semantic: bge-m3-unsupervised 0.756 0.182 93.6%
Semantic: snowflake-arctic-embed-l-v2.0 0.788 0.182 92.3%
Semantic: OpenAI text-emb.-3-large 0.872 0.192 97.4%
Semantic: Octen-Embedding-4B 0.883 0.185 94.9%
aDokuWiki rows: Precision@10 (keyword search returns at most 10 results); semantic rows: P@5. See
Section 6.1.2 for metric definitions.
Figure 6.8:Query miss pattern: queries for which DokuWiki keyword search returns no
relevant result in the top-10. Semantic search resolves the majority of these
failures.
103
6.6 Authentication with Scalekit Jan Ritt
6.5.3 Comparative Analysis
The systematic analysis of failure cases reveals four root causes for the inferiority of
keyword search:
1. AND logic and stopwords: Natural-language sentences contain numerous
stopwords that DokuWiki does not index. With AND logic, each non-indexed
word causes the page to be classified as “not matching.”
2. Missing semantic bridge:Content relationships such as between “Notrufnum-
mer” (emergency number) and “122” or between “gebraucht” (used) and “refur-
bished” are not recognized by keyword search. Semantic embeddings capture
these relationships through the vector space.
3. No synonym handling:DokuWiki does not recognize synonyms (“Matura”
vs. “Reifepruefung,” both meaning final examination) or morphological variants.
Embedding models map synonymous terms to similar vectors.
4. Compound words and inflections:German compounds (“Werkstaettenunter-
richt” – workshop instruction, “Klassenvorstand” – class teacher) and inflected
forms are not resolved by keyword search. Neural models process these via
subword tokenization.
The existing DokuWiki search is largely unusable for natural-language queries of the
kind typical in daily school use (5.1% hit rate). Even under optimal conditions (hand-
picked keywords), it fails nearly two-thirds of queries. The RAG pipeline closes this
gap with a hit rate of nearly 95%.
For FF1, the vocabulary mismatch documented above is largely removed once queries
and pages share the same embedding space: the RAG pipeline with Octen-Embedding-
4B reaches MRR0.883 and a 94.9% hit rate versus DokuWiki MRR0.051/ 0.365 and
hit rates 5.1%/37.2%. Figure 6.9 places these figures in the context of every retrieval
method evaluated in this chapter.
6.6 Authentication with Scalekit
The MCP specification recommends OAuth 2.1 for securing HTTP Streamable transport
endpoints. This section documents the authentication and authorization architecture
104
6.6 Authentication with Scalekit Jan Ritt
Figure 6.9:Overall comparison of DokuWiki keyword search vs. semantic RAG retrieval
on 78 ground-truth questions. MRR bars are scaled to the full [0,1] range
across all evaluated retrieval methods.
105
6.6 Authentication with Scalekit Jan Ritt
implemented with Scalekit as the identity provider, fulfilling the ABA objective of
OAuth2 integration for secure LeoWiki access.
6.6.1 Scalekit Configuration
Scalekit (Python SDK ≥2.4.0, accessed February 2026) [57] provides OAuth 2.1-
compliant authentication as a managed service. The MCP server registers as an
OAuth 2.1 Protected Resource– it does not manage user credentials directly but vali-
dates tokens issued by Scalekit.
The configuration requires five environment variables, passed through Docker Compose
to themcp-server container:
1 SCALEKIT_ENV_URL=https://mcpeduauth.scalekit.dev
2 SCALEKIT_CLIENT_ID=<client-id>
3 SCALEKIT_CLIENT_SECRET=<client-secret>
4 SCALEKIT_EXPECTED_AUDIENCE=https://leowiki-mcp.stream
5 SCALEKIT_PROTECTED_RESOURCE_METADATA=<json-from-dashboard>
Listing 6.1:Scalekit environment variables in docker-compose.yml.
The OAuth 2.1 discovery endpoint ( /.well-known/oauth-protected-resource)
serves metadata that enables AI clients such as Claude Desktop to discover the au-
thorization server automatically. The implementation inoauth_metadata.py supports
both dashboard-provided metadata (production) and auto-generated fallback metadata
(development):
1 metadata = {
2 "resource": config.scalekit_mcp_server_id,
3 "authorization_servers": [config.scalekit_env_url],
4 "bearer_methods_supported": ["header"],
5 "resource_signing_alg_values_supported": ["RS256"],
6 "scopes_supported": ["mcp:read", "mcp:write"],
7 }
Listing 6.2:OAuth Protected Resource metadata generation (simplified).
The OAuth 2.1 Authorization Code Flow with PKCE is implemented in
auth/oauth_flow.py. On login initiation, a CSRF-resistant state parameter and
a PKCE code verifier are generated usingsecrets.token_urlsafe(32). The flow
redirects to Scalekit’s authorization endpoint withopenid profile email scopes, and
the callback endpoint exchanges the authorization code for an access token via the
token endpoint.
106
6.6 Authentication with Scalekit Jan Ritt
6.6.2 JWT Token Validation
Every request to a protected MCP endpoint must carry a Bearer token in the
Authorization header. The ScalekitAuthMiddleware validates tokens using the
official Scalekit Python SDK:
1. Bearer token extraction. The middleware extracts the token from the
Authorization: Bearer <token> header. Missing or empty tokens result in a
401 response with aWWW-Authenticate header pointing to the discovery endpoint.
2. Token validation via Scalekit SDK.The SDK’s validate_access_token
method verifies the RS256 signature using JWKS keys fetched from
/.well-known/jwks.json, validates expiration (exp), issuance time (iat), is-
suer (iss), and audience (aud).
3. Claims extraction. On successful validation, the decoded JWT claims are
extracted: sub (user ID),email, name, org_id, androles.
4. User state propagation. The extracted user information is attached to
request.state.user, making it available to downstream tool handlers.
Public endpoints that bypass authentication include the OAuth discovery endpoint,
health checks, the login/callback/logout flow, and the favicon request. This allowlist is
maintained in the middleware’s_is_public_endpoint method.
6.6.3 RBAC to Namespace Mapping
The Role-Based Access Control (RBAC) model maps three Scalekit roles to DokuWiki
namespace access levels:
Table 6.16:RBAC role hierarchy and namespace access. Each role inherits access from
all lower roles.
Role Content Tools Resources
student Public pages (no teacher:) search_content_student None
teacher All pages incl. teacher: + search_content_teacher None
admin All pages, all namespaces + stats tools All
The role hierarchy is encoded in theROLE_ACCESS_LEVELS dictionary:
107
6.6 Authentication with Scalekit Jan Ritt
1 ROLE_ACCESS_LEVELS = {
2 "student": ["student"],
3 "teacher": ["student", "teacher"],
4 "admin": ["student", "teacher", "admin"],
5 }
Listing 6.3:RBAC role hierarchy for search filtering.
Defense-in-Depth: Separate Tools. The two-tool RBAC separation (cf. Section 5.6)
is reflected in the Qdrant query layer. The student tool applies namespace filtering on
the retrieval results, while the teacher tool returns results from all namespaces. This
architectural separation is resilient against prompt-injection attacks at the RBAC level:
even if a malicious prompt instructs the AI client to “ignore role restrictions,” the MCP
server exposes onlysearch_content_student to student-authenticated sessions. The
search_content_teacher tool is structurally unavailable – it is never listed in the tool
catalog sent to the client, so neither the LLM nor the user can invoke it regardless of
prompt content.
The student search tool employs a dynamic oversampling strategy to compensate for
filtered results: it fetches 3× the requested result limit from Qdrant, filters outteacher:
namespace results in Python, and doubles the fetch limit iteratively until the requested
number of student-accessible results is reached (with a safety cap at 10× the limit).
The implementation filters on thesource URL field (which contains the DokuWiki
namespace prefix, e.g.teacher:exams/java) rather than on theaccess_level meta-
data field. This is a deliberate design choice: access_level is itself derived
from the namespace prefix during preprocessing (determine_access_level() assigns
teacher_only to pages whose namespace starts withteacher: orlehrer:), so filtering
on “teacher:” /∈ source is functionally equivalent to filtering onaccess_level ̸=
“teacher_only” for the current LeoWiki corpus. The Python-level post-filter provides
an additional safety layer: teacher content is excluded from the responsebeforeit reaches
the LLM context window, independently of the vector database’s filter configuration.
The get_access_filter() function andROLE_ACCESS_LEVELS dictionary are prepared
as infrastructure for a future migration to Qdrant-native filtering, which would reduce
over-fetching when the role model expands beyond the current binary student/teacher
split.
108
6.7 Deployment Jan Ritt
6.6.4 Security Testing
The RBAC implementation is verified through 30 collected deterministic test cases
in test_rbac_deterministic.py (19 test functions; one parametrized function con-
tributes 12 role–tool matrix cases). The tests are organized into seven test classes:
1. TestStudentPermissions(3 tests): Verifies student tool access, blocked tools,
and no resource access.
2. TestTeacherPermissions(3 tests): Verifies teacher tool access beyond the
student set and blocked admin tools.
3. TestAdminPermissions(2 tests): Verifies that admins can access all tools and
resources.
4. TestSecurityIsolation (4 tests): Verifies privilege escalation prevention and
unknown or empty roles.
5. TestPermissionMatrix(1 parametrized test, 12 cases): Exercises the full role–
tool permission matrix.
6. TestRBACEnforcementLogic(3 tests): Verifies tool filtering and unauthorized
tool calls.
7. TestContentAccessLevels(3 tests): Verifies namespace-level content visibility
per role.
Additionally, 4 JWT validation tests intest_jwt_validation.py verify token han-
dling: valid token acceptance, expired token rejection, invalid audience rejection,
and malformed token rejection. The tests use mocked JWT tokens generated with
PyJWT v2.8.x.
All RBAC tests are deterministic – they require no external services and execute in
under 1 second, making them suitable for CI integration.
6.7 Deployment
The deployment architecture targets a Raspberry Pi 5 (8 GB RAM, ARM64) as
the production host, chosen for its low power consumption (∼5W idle), continuous
availability in the school network, and zero licensing costs.
109
6.7 Deployment Jan Ritt
6.7.1 Docker Containerization
The MCP server is packaged as a Docker image based onpython:3.13-slim. The
Dockerfile follows Docker layer caching best practices:
1 FROM python:3.13-slim
2 WORKDIR /app
3 RUN apt-get update && apt-get install -y gcc g++ curl \
4 && rm -rf /var/lib/apt/lists/*
5 COPY requirements.txt .
6 RUN pip install --no-cache-dir -r requirements.txt
7 COPY src/ ./src/
8 COPY main.py .
9 RUN mkdir -p data/incoming data/processed data/failed
10 ENV PYTHONUNBUFFERED=1
11 HEALTHCHECK --interval=30s --timeout=10s --start-period=40s \
12 CMD curl -f http://localhost:8000/health || exit 1
13 EXPOSE 8000
14 CMD ["python", "main.py", "--http"]
Listing 6.4:MCP server Dockerfile (simplified).
Key design decisions:
• requirements.txt is copied before application code to maximize layer cache hits
during development.
• The HEALTHCHECK directive enables Docker’s native health monitoring with a
40-second start-up grace period.
• The –http flag starts the server in HTTP Streamable mode (as opposed to stdio),
appropriate for production behind a reverse proxy.
6.7.2 Docker Compose Architecture
The production deployment consists of four services orchestrated via Docker Com-
pose:
Table 6.17: Docker Compose service architecture for the production deployment.
Service Image Network Responsibility
caddy caddy:2.9.1-alpine frontend TLS termination, reverse proxy
mcp-server Python 3.13 (custom) both MCP protocol, search, RBAC
qdrant qdrant/qdrant:v1.14.1 backend Vector storage, HNSW, search
watchdog Python 3.13 (custom) backend JSONL auto-ingestion
110
6.7 Deployment Jan Ritt
Network Isolation. The container architecture is shown in Figure 4.4 (Section 4.5.1).
The architecture enforces network segmentation through two Docker bridge net-
works:
• frontend-network: Connects Caddy to the MCP server. Only Caddy exposes
ports to the host (80, 443, 443/udp for HTTP/3).
• backend-network: Connects the MCP server and Watchdog to Qdrant. Qdrant’s
HTTP dashboard (port 6333) is bound to127.0.0.1 only, accessible via SSH
tunnel for administration.
The MCP server has no externally exposed ports – all client traffic passes through
Caddy’s TLS termination. Bearer tokens are therefore never transmitted in cleart-
ext.
Caddy Reverse Proxy. Caddy provides automatic TLS certificate management via
Let’s Encrypt for the domainleowiki-mcp.stream. The Caddyfile configures:
• Automatic HTTPS with HTTP-to-HTTPS redirect.
• Reverse proxy tomcp-server:8000 for all MCP traffic.
• HTTP/3 support via QUIC (UDP port 443).
Watchdog Service. The Watchdog container monitors thedata/incoming/ directory
for new JSONL files. When a file is detected (e.g., after a pipeline run copies the output
via SCP), the Watchdog:
1. Clears the existing Qdrant collection (CLEAR_COLLECTION_BEFORE_INGEST=true).
2. Ingests the new JSONL data with pre-computed embeddings.
3. Moves the processed file todata/processed/.
Content updates therefore do not require a manual restart of the MCP stack: the
pipeline operator runs the offline pipeline on a development machine and transfers the
resulting JSONL file to the Raspberry Pi via SCP; the Watchdog ingest replaces the
collection in place.
111
6.7 Deployment Jan Ritt
6.7.3 Deployment to Raspberry Pi
The deployment target is a Raspberry Pi 5 with 8 GB RAM running Raspberry Pi OS
(Debian Bookworm, ARM64; 2025-11-19 image). The deployment process follows the
scripts inpipeline/05_deploy/:
1. Prerequisites: Docker and Docker Compose are installed on the Pi. The domain
leowiki-mcp.stream is configured with an A record pointing to the school’s
public IP.
2. File transfer:The pipeline output (educational_content.jsonl) is transferred
via scp to the Pi’sdata/incoming/ directory.
3. Service start:docker compose up -d launches all four services. Caddy auto-
matically provisions TLS certificates on first start.
4. Verification: The health endpoint (https://leowiki-mcp.stream/health)
confirms service availability. The Qdrant dashboard (via SSH tunnel to
localhost:6333) confirms data ingestion.
Resource consumption on the Raspberry Pi 5 in steady state (snapshot fromdocker
stats under idle load on 2026-02-26):
• Memory: ∼1.2GB total (Qdrant:∼600MB with 6,002 vectors; MCP server:
∼200MB; Caddy:∼50MB; Watchdog:∼80MB).
• CPU: <5% average (ARM Cortex-A76, 4 cores at 2.4GHz). Spikes during
embedding generation for incoming queries (delegated to OpenAI API).
• Storage:∼2GB for Docker images and volumes (Qdrant data:∼500MB).
6.7.4 npm Package Decision
The original ABA scope specified investigating deployment via both Docker and npm.
After evaluation, npm distribution was deemed not suitable for this project—a
deliberate, reasoned deviation from the original ABA scope:
1. Technology mismatch:The MCP server is a Python application. npm is the
Node.js package manager; distributing a Python project via npm would require
users to install a separate Python runtime, contradicting the simplicity goal.
112
6.8 Embedding and Retrieval Testing Jan Ritt
2. Unresolvable backend dependency: The server requires a Qdrant vector
database. An npm package cannot bundle or provision a database service; users
would still need to run Qdrant separately.
3. Docker Compose already solves the problem:A singledocker compose up
-d command provisions all four services (Caddy, MCP server, Qdrant, Watchdog)
with correct networking, volumes, and restart policies.
This scope decision was discussed with the thesis supervisor. It is consistent with
the MCP ecosystem, where the majority of production MCP servers use Docker for
deployment. Thepackage.json contains metadata for the project but is not published
as an installable npm package.
6.8 Embedding and Retrieval Testing
The test suite for the embedding and retrieval components comprises 98 test functions
across 20 test files, organized into two tiers: 88 deterministic unit tests in 10 files
(Table 6.18) and 10 integration tests requiring live dependencies in 10 files. These
counts cover only the embedding and retrieval codebase; the MCP server maintains a
separate test suite (Section 5.11). Additionally, five evaluation scripts implement the
quantitative analyses.
6.8.1 Test Architecture
All tests use the FastMCP In-Memory Transport pattern [34]: the test creates a server
instance and communicates with it through an in-process transport, avoiding network
overhead and external dependencies. With this pattern, tests typically finish in under
100ms per test function and can run in CI environments without Docker.
1 from fastmcp import FastMCP, Client
2
3 async def test_search_tool_exists():
4 mcp = FastMCP("test-server")
5 register_search_tools(mcp)
6 async with Client(mcp) as client:
7 tools = await client.list_tools()
8 assert any(t.name == "search_content_student"
9 for t in tools)
Listing 6.5:FastMCP In-Memory Transport test pattern (simplified).
113
6.8 Embedding and Retrieval Testing Jan Ritt
6.8.2 Unit Tests
The deterministic test suite covers three domains:
Table 6.18: Deterministic test coverage summary.
Test File Domain Tests Scope
test_tools_deterministic MCP tools/resources/prompts 22 Tool registration,
annotation cor-
rectness, schema
validation
test_rbac_deterministic RBAC permissions 19 Role isolation, priv-
ilege escalation, un-
known roles
test_query_logger Audit logging 11 Log persistence,
statistics aggrega-
tion, rotation
test_rbac_tools RBAC tool access 7 Tool-level access
control enforcement
test_mcp_resources MCP resources 7 Resource registra-
tion and content
serving
test_mcp_prompts MCP prompts 6 Prompt template
rendering
test_mcp_tools MCP tool invocation 5 Tool argument val-
idation, error han-
dling
test_jwt_validation JWT processing 4 Token validation,
expiry, audience,
malformed tokens
test_server_endpoints HTTP endpoints 4 Health check,
OAuth metadata,
CORS
test_server Server lifecycle 3 Startup, shutdown,
configuration load-
ing
All 88 deterministic tests require no external services and execute in under 5 seconds
total.
6.8.3 Integration Tests
Integration tests verify the system against live external dependencies:
• test_search_live.py – Executes a search query against a running Qdrant
instance and verifies that results contain expected payload fields (title, text,
source).
114
6.8 Embedding and Retrieval Testing Jan Ritt
• test_ingestion_live.py – Ingests a test JSONL file into Qdrant and verifies
point count and payload integrity.
• test_mcp_http_streamable.py – Starts the MCP server in HTTP Streamable
mode and sends a complete JSON-RPC 2.0 request/response cycle via HTTP
POST.
• test_stdio_with_new_data.py – Tests the stdio transport with freshly ingested
data.
Integration tests are marked with@pytest.mark.integration and excluded from the
default test run (pytest -m "not integration").
6.8.4 Evaluation Framework
The evaluation scripts inevaluation/scripts/ implement the quantitative analyses
reported in Sections 6.1–6.5:
• eval_keyword_baseline.py– Compares DokuWiki keyword search with se-
mantic search (78 queries, 3 configurations).
• eval_model_comparison.py – Benchmarks five embedding models on the
LeoWiki corpus.
• eval_chunk_size.py– Tests three chunk sizes (256, 512, and 1024 tokens).
• eval_hybrid_vs_dense.py– Compares pure dense retrieval with hybrid search
(RRF fusion).
• eval_pipeline.py – Orchestrates the full evaluation workflow: retrieval, metrics,
RAGAS, statistical analysis, and report generation.
All evaluation scripts use the shared ground-truth dataset of 78 question-answer pairs
(evaluation/ground_truth/), ensuring cross-evaluation comparability.
6.8.5 Benchmark Reproducibility
To satisfy the non-functional requirement NFR-3 (Reproducibility), all evaluations
document:
• Hardware: NVIDIA RTX 4080 Laptop GPU (12 GB VRAM), AMD Ryzen 9,
32 GB RAM.
115
6.8 Embedding and Retrieval Testing Jan Ritt
• Software: Python 3.11, Qdrant v1.14.1, sentence-transformers 3.3, tiktoken 0.5.
The MCP server runs Python 3.13 with FastMCP 3.0.
• Corpus version:LeoWiki snapshot date, page count, chunk count.
• Configuration: Embedding model name, chunk size, overlap, Qdrant distance
metric.
• Raw results: All evaluation outputs are stored as JSON files in
evaluation/results/ with timestamps and configuration hashes.
The CI pipeline (.github/workflows/ci.yml) runs the deterministic test suite on
every push, ensuring that refactoring does not break existing functionality.
116
7 Results and Conclusion
7.1 Achieved Results
For each question, the evaluation methodology, key metrics, and principal findings are
referenced with pointers to the detailed analyses in Chapters 5 and 6.
7.1.1 FF1 – Semantic Search vs. Keyword Search
Research question FF1 asked:How effectively can a semantic search based on sentence
embeddings replace keyword-based search in an educational wiki (LeoWiki)?
The evaluation (Section 6.5) compared the DokuWiki keyword search with the
embedding-based retrieval system on a shared ground-truth dataset of 78 question-
answer pairs across 12 of the wiki’s 23 namespaces.
Table 7.1: FF1 summary: Keyword search vs. semantic search on 78 test queries.
Method MRR P@10/P@5 a Hit Rate
DokuWiki keyword (full question) 0.051 0.010 5.1%
DokuWiki keyword (optimal keywords) 0.365 0.074 37.2%
Semantic search (Octen-4B) 0.883 0.185 94.9%
Semantic search (OpenAI, production) 0.872 0.192 97.4%
aDokuWiki rows: Precision@10; semantic rows: P@5.
The semantic search with the production embedding model (OpenAI
text-embedding-3-large) achieves a 17-fold MRR improvement over the
keyword search with full natural-language questions (0.872 vs. 0.051) and a2.4-fold
improvementover manually optimized keywords (0.872 vs. 0.365). The hit rate rises
from 5.1% to 97.4%, meaning that in the production system, 76 out of 78 test queries
successfully retrieve a relevant wiki page in the top-10 results.
The four root causes of the keyword search’s failure – AND logic combined with
stopword filtering, missing semantic bridging, absent synonym handling, and unre-
solved German compound words – are avoided by the embedding-based approach (cf.
Section 6.5.3).
117
7.1 Achieved Results Jan Ritt, Imre Obermüller
FF1: Semantic search improves MRR by a factor of 17 over keyword search for the
LeoWiki corpus, raising the hit rate from 5.1% to 97.4%.
7.1.2 FF2 – MCP as Integration Standard
FF2 addresses the suitability of the Model Context Protocol as a standardized interface:
How suitable is the Model Context Protocol (MCP) as an interface between a specialized
search server and heterogeneous AI applications?The evaluation below also notes
practical limitations observed during interoperability testing.
Section 5.10 presents a compatibility matrix of five major AI clients and practical
interoperability tests with three selected clients (Table 5.7).
Key findings:
1. Tool support is consistent across compatible clients.All three tested
clients invoked MCP tools successfully in the manual test protocol—the primary
mechanism through which the LeoWiki server exposes its search functionality.
GoogleGeminiandMicrosoftCopilot(consumer)weresurveyedbutdonotsupport
remote MCP with OAuth 2.1 in their consumer products (as of February 2026).
2. Dual-transport coverage is sufficient.The two transports – stdio for local
desktop clients and HTTP Streamable for web-based clients – cover all tested
deployment scenarios. The LeoWiki server implements both.
3. Resources and Prompts have fragmented support.Not all clients support
Resources or Prompts natively. TheResourcesAsTools and PromptsAsTools
transforms in FastMCP 3.0 mitigate this by exposing all primitives as tools for
clients with limited feature sets.
4. OAuth 2.1 authenticationis supported by three of the five tested clients
(Claude, ChatGPT, Mistral), enabling standardized token-based access for the
target audience.
5. Transport latency meets NFR-1.Benchmarks on the production hardware
measured a mean end-to-end search latency of∼226ms via stdio and∼321ms
via HTTP (Section 5.3.4), both within the 2s response-time target. The stdio
transport adds 6.3× less protocol overhead than HTTP (17.9ms vs. 113.1ms).
118
7.1 Achieved Results Jan Ritt, Imre Obermüller
Limitations observed include the rapid specification evolution (three revisions within
one year), fragmented advanced feature support (no client implements all features), and
the necessity of dual-transport implementation on the server side.
Table 7.2: FF2 summary: MCP client compatibility (February 2026).
Client Remote MCP OAuth 2.1 Tool Support
Claude ✓ ✓ ✓
ChatGPT ✓ ✓ ✓
Mistral Le Chat ✓ ✓ ✓
Gemini × × —
Copilot × × —
FF2: MCP proved suitable as an integration interface for knowledge sources in the
tested configuration. The identified limitations – fragmented advanced features, rapid
specification evolution – are manageable for the LeoWiki use case but warrant monitor-
ing.
7.1.3 FF3 – Embedding Model Selection for German
Research question FF3 asked: Which sentence embedding model achieves the best
retrieval quality for German-language educational content on resource-limited hard-
ware?
The embedding model comparison (FF3) tested five models on the full LeoWiki corpus
(10,841 chunks, 78 ground-truth questions). Table 7.3 summarizes the results from
Section 6.1:
Table 7.3: FF3 summary: Embedding model comparison on LeoWiki corpus.
Model MRR NDCG@10 Hit Rate Params
Octen-Embedding-4B 0.883 0.899 94.9% 4.0B
text-embedding-3-large 0.872 0.897 97.4% API
PIXIE-Rune-v1.0 0.802 0.823 88.5% 568M
snowflake-arctic-embed-l-v2.0 0.788 0.822 92.3% 568M
bge-m3-unsupervised 0.756 0.800 93.6% 568M
As detailed in Section 6.1, models divide into two tiers: Tier 1 (Octen-4B, OpenAI)
exceeds MRR 0.87, while 568M-parameter models remain in the 0.76–0.80 range,
consistent with the MTEB leaderboard as a pre-screening heuristic for German-language
retrieval tasks.
119
7.2 Limitations Jan Ritt, Imre Obermüller
For production deployment on a Raspberry Pi 5 (no GPU), OpenAI
text-embedding-3-large was selected as the pragmatic choice: the 1.1 percentage
point MRR difference to Octen-4B is negligible, while the deployment complexity is
substantially reduced (cf. Section 6.1.4).
FF3: The five-model comparison identifies Octen-Embedding-4B as the quality leader
for this corpus and documents the engineering trade-off that led to OpenAI as the
production model.
7.2 Limitations
7.2.1 Technical Limitations
1. No real-time index updates.The system relies on a periodically executed
offline pipeline. Changes to wiki content are not reflected in search results until
the pipeline is re-run. For a school wiki with relatively infrequent content changes,
this is acceptable; for wikis with high update frequency, a real-time ingestion
mechanism would be required.
2. Single-model evaluation environment. All embedding evaluations were
conducted on a single GPU (NVIDIA RTX 4080 Laptop, 12 GB VRAM). Inference
timing results may not generalize to other hardware configurations.
3. Ground-truth sample size. The 78 question-answer pairs permit pairwise
non-parametric tests (Wilcoxon signed-rank) and bootstrap confidence intervals;
all direct comparisons in Chapter 6 include these. However, the sample size limits
statistical power for small effects: atn = 78 paired observations a Wilcoxon test
achieves approximately 50–60% power for Cohen’sd≈ 0.2. Non-significant results
(e.g., chunk-size comparisons,p> 0.06) should therefore be read asinconclusive
rather than as evidence of equivalence; they are reported with this caveat in
Section 6.2.3.
4. AI-generated ground-truth bias.The 78 question-answer pairs were generated
by Claude Opus 4.6 and manually verified by both authors (Section 6.1.2). AI-
generated questions may systematically favor paraphrase-style formulations that
embedding models handle well, potentially inflating absolute MRR values for
semantic search. The manual verification protocol eliminates factual errors but
does not fully address this distributional bias. Because thesame question set was
120
7.2 Limitations Jan Ritt, Imre Obermüller
used for both keyword and semantic evaluation, therelative comparison (17-fold
MRR gap) remains valid even if absolute values are optimistic.
5. Raspberry Pi resource constraints.The deployment target (8 GB RAM,
ARM64, no GPU) precludes local embedding model inference. The system depends
on the OpenAI API for embedding generation during pipeline execution.
6. BM25 tokenizer simplicity. The hybrid search evaluation used a simple
whitespace tokenizer without lemmatization or compound decomposition. A more
sophisticated German-aware tokenizer might yield different hybrid search results.
7.2.2 Scope Limitations
1. Single wiki instance.The system was developed and evaluated exclusively on
the HTL Leonding LeoWiki. Transferability to other DokuWiki instances or wiki
platforms has not been empirically verified.
2. No integration with Leonidas/Leonie. The SYP projects Leonidas and
Leonie are organizationally separate and not part of this diploma thesis.
3. No continuous deployment (CD).Automated deployment to the Raspberry Pi
was not implemented; production updates rely on manual file transfer. A continu-
ous integration workflow (GitHub Actions) runs lint, type checks, and tests on
every push (Section 5.11.3).
4. Query-time data transmission.The production system sends user queries to
the OpenAI Embeddings API for vectorization at search time. Only the short
query text is transmitted; the wiki content itself is embedded offline during pipeline
execution and stored locally in Qdrant. In the school context, HTL Leonding
already uses cloud services (Microsoft 365) for student data, and the transmitted
queries contain no personal data beyond the search terms. For deployments
with stricter data sovereignty requirements, the local embedding path via Octen-
Embedding-4B (Section 6.1.4) eliminates external API dependencies entirely.
5. OAuth2 scope.The Scalekit integration covers the Authorization Code Flow
with PKCE. Token refresh automation and session management are implemented
but not extensively load-tested.
6. npm distribution deviation.The originally planned investigation of npm as a
deployment channel for the Python MCP server stack was completed; npm distri-
121
7.3 Lessons Learned Jan Ritt, Imre Obermüller
bution was deemed unsuitable for this project (see Section 6.7.4)—a deliberate,
documented deviation from the initial ABA scope.
7.3 Lessons Learned
7.3.1 Technical Insights
1. Dense retrieval outperformed hybrid search on the LeoWiki corpus.
The evaluation of hybrid search (Section 6.4) showed that adding BM25 to dense
retrieval reducedsearch quality for the LeoWiki corpus. The BM25 component
provided redundant and occasionally conflicting signals, confirming that for a
domain-specific corpus of∼10,000 chunks, a domain-appropriate embedding model
alone achieved higher MRR than the hybrid setup. This finding is consistent
with the broader RAG literature noting that hybrid approaches can benefit large,
heterogeneous corpora [53], whereas a domain-specific, single-language wiki corpus
did not profit from the additional BM25 signal.
2. MTEB leaderboard rankings transfer to domain-specific tasks.The
correlation between MTEB RTEB(deu) rankings and actual performance on
LeoWiki content is consistent with using the leaderboard as a practical selection
heuristic for German-language retrieval tasks.
3. Two-tool separation provides defense-in-depth for access control.Im-
plementing two physically separate search tools (search_content_student and
search_content_teacher) instead of a single tool with a role parameter avoids
LLM parameter-manipulation attacks by design. The RBAC enforcement oper-
ates at the tool level before any search logic executes. This was verified through
30 deterministic test cases (Section 6.6.4); broader adversarial testing against
prompt-injection attacks remains as future work.
4. 512-token chunks are optimal for structured wiki content.The chunk-size
evaluation revealed a concave pattern (256< 512> 1024): 256 tokens lose context,
1024 tokens dilute relevance, and 512 tokens provide the best balance for this
corpus (MRR 0.876 in the chunk-size experiment, Section 6.2.3), consistent with
trade-offs documented in RAG practitioner guides [51].
122
7.4 Future Work Jan Ritt, Imre Obermüller
7.3.2 Process Insights
1. Evaluation-first methodology saved rework.Constructing the ground-truth
dataset early and reusing it across all evaluations ensured consistent baselines
and eliminated confounding variables from differing test sets.
2. The MCP specification evolves rapidly.Three specification revisions within
one year (2024-11-05, 2025-03-26, 2025-11-25) required continuous adaptation
of the server implementation. FastMCP 3.0 absorbed most breaking changes,
but the transport protocol migration from HTTP+SSE to Streamable HTTP
necessitated structural changes.
3. AI-assisted content generation requires rigorous verification.The ground-
truth dataset was generated using Claude Opus 4.6 and then manually verified.
Several generated questions contained factual errors or referenced non-existent wiki
pages, underscoring the necessity of human oversight for AI-generated evaluation
data.
7.4 Future Work
The MCP-based architecture developed in this thesis can be extended along several
dimensions:
Real-time content synchronization. DokuWiki provides action hooks
(COMMON_SAVE_AFTER) that fire when a page is saved. A DokuWiki plugin could trigger
incremental re-embedding of modified pages, eliminating the need for full pipeline
re-runs. The Qdrant upsert API already supports point-level updates, making the
database side of this extension straightforward.
Multi-wiki federation. The architecture separates the protocol layer (MCP server)
from the content layer (embedding and retrieval). By replacing only the wiki connector
component (Stage 1 of the pipeline), the system can be adapted to other wiki platforms
(MediaWiki, Confluence) or document management systems. Multiple wiki sources could
be served through a single MCP server with source-specific namespace filtering.
Enterprise identity integration with Microsoft Entra.For school-wide deployments
where students and teachers already authenticate through Microsoft 365, integrating
Microsoft Entra ID as an external identity provider would enable Single Sign-On for
123
7.5 Conclusion Jan Ritt, Imre Obermüller
the MCP server without requiring a separate credential store. Entra supports both
SAML and OpenID Connect [58], the latter aligning directly with the OAuth 2.1 flow
already prepared in the server’s authentication middleware (Section 5.4). Combined
with Entra’s Conditional Access policies and group-based role assignments, the existing
RBAC middleware could derive user roles automatically from directory attributes,
ensuring that access is denied at the next token refresh cycle when an account is
deactivated. A bridging layer such as Scalekit [59] could further simplify the token
exchange between Entra and the MCP server, reducing much of the integration effort
to configuration rather than code changes.
Qdrant-native access control filtering.The current student search tool filters
on the source URL namespace prefix in Python (Section 6.6.4). Migrating to the
prepared get_access_filter() function, which uses Qdrant’s nativeaccess_level
field condition, would eliminate the over-fetching overhead of the dynamic oversampling
strategy and is recommended when the role model expands beyond the current binary
student/teacher split.
Fine-tuning on school corpus.The current system uses general-purpose embed-
ding models. Fine-tuning a model on the specific vocabulary and query patterns of
HTL Leonding (using the 78 ground-truth pairs as a seed dataset) could further improve
retrieval quality for domain-specific queries.
Local embedding inference.As ARM-based single-board computers gain GPU capa-
bilities (e.g., NVIDIA Jetson), running Octen-Embedding-4B locally on the deployment
target would eliminate the dependency on the OpenAI API and resolve the data privacy
trade-off documented in Section 6.1.4.
7.5 Conclusion
This diploma thesis addressed a specific problem: the internal wiki of HTL Leonding
contains organizational knowledge that its users cannot find. The built-in keyword search
achieves a hit rate of only 5.1% for natural-language queries – a direct consequence
of the vocabulary mismatch between how users ask questions and how content is
indexed.
The developed system – comprising a five-stage offline pipeline, a vector database
with 3,072-dimensional embeddings, and an MCP server with dual transport support
124
7.5 Conclusion Jan Ritt, Imre Obermüller
– raises this hit rate to 97.4% (MRR 0.872). Measured end-to-end search latency
averages∼321ms via the production HTTP transport, well within the 2s response-
time requirement (NFR-1). The server is compatible with the three major AI clients
tested (Claude, ChatGPT, Mistral Le Chat) and enforces role-based access control
through OAuth 2.1 (draft-ietf-oauth-v2-1-12 at time of submission; cf. Section 2.3.1)
with Scalekit, ensuring that students cannot access teacher-only content.
The three research questions have been answered:
• FF1: The large MRR gap versus keyword search matches the vocabulary-
mismatch analysis in Section 6.5.3: embeddings remove the need for hand-crafted
query terms.
• FF2: MCP covered the tested clients without protocol forks; remaining friction
is uneven Resources/Prompts support, not transport-level incompatibility.
• FF3: Quality ranking (Octen-4B vs. OpenAI) is clear, but deployment constraints
on the Pi invert the recommendation toward the API model despite a small MRR
delta.
The system is deployed as a Docker Compose stack on a Raspberry Pi 5, accessible via
the domainleowiki-mcp.stream with automatic TLS certificate management. The
entire LeoWiki corpus of 196 pages and 320 media files is indexed at a one-time cost of
$0.14.
Beyond the immediate application, this work shows that text embeddings indexed in a
vector database and exposed through the Model Context Protocol can make a legacy
knowledge system accessible via AI interfaces at low cost and on modest hardware.
Whether this approach transfers to other knowledge systems would require verification
in those specific contexts.
125
7.5 Conclusion Jan Ritt, Imre Obermüller
VI
Glossary
ACL Access Control List
API Application Programming Interface
ARM Advanced RISC Machines
ASGI Asynchronous Server Gateway Interface
BM25 Best Matching 25
Caddy A web server with automatic HTTPS certificate management via Let’s Encrypt,
used as the reverse proxy in the production Docker Compose deployment
CI Continuous Integration
CLI Command-Line Interface
DokuWiki An open-source wiki software that uses plain text files for storage instead
of a relational database. Used as the platform for LeoWiki at HTL Leonding
FastAPI A modern Python web framework for building APIs, used as the HTTP layer
underlying the MCP server’s Streamable HTTP transport
FastMCP A Python framework for implementing MCP-compliant servers with
decorator-based tool/resource/prompt registration and support for stdio and
HTTP Streamable transports
GDPR General Data Protection Regulation
ground truth A manually verified dataset of question-answer pairs used as the reference
for evaluating retrieval quality. In this thesis: 78 Q&A pairs covering 12 LeoWiki
namespaces
HNSW Hierarchical Navigable Small World
IDE Integrated Development Environment
VII
Glossary Jan Ritt, Imre Obermüller
IDF Inverse Document Frequency
JSON-RPC JSON Remote Procedure Call
JWKS JSON Web Key Set
JWT JSON Web Token
LeoWiki The internal DokuWiki instance of HTL Leonding, containing 196 pages and
320 media files across 23 namespaces (12 covered by the evaluation ground truth)
MCP Model Context Protocol
MRR Mean Reciprocal Rank
MTEB Massive Text Embedding Benchmark
NDCG Normalized Discounted Cumulative Gain
NLP Natural Language Processing
OAuth Open Authorization
OIDC OpenID Connect
PKCE Proof Key for Code Exchange
Qdrant A Rust-based open-source vector database optimized for similarity search with
support for payload filtering, HNSW indexing, and ARM64 deployment
RAG Retrieval-Augmented Generation
RBAC Role-Based Access Control
RRF Reciprocal Rank Fusion
RTEB Retrieval Text Embedding Benchmark
SBERT Sentence-BERT
Scalekit A managed identity provider supporting OAuth 2.1, OIDC, and SAML, used
to authenticate users and provide role-based access tokens for the MCP server
SDK Software Development Kit
SSE Server-Sent Events
text embedding A dense vector representation of text in a high-dimensional space
where semantic similarity corresponds to geometric proximity
VIII
Glossary Jan Ritt, Imre Obermüller
TLS Transport Layer Security
VRAM Video Random Access Memory
IX
Bibliography
[1] DokuWiki Community. (2024) DokuWiki – the wiki that does not require a
database. [Online]. Available: https://www.dokuwiki.org/
[2] C. D. Manning, P. Raghavan, and H. Schütze, Introduction to Information
Retrieval. Cambridge University Press, 2008. [Online]. Available: https:
//nlp.stanford.edu/IR-book/
[3] Anthropic. (2024) Model context protocol specification. [Online]. Available:
https://spec.modelcontextprotocol.io/
[4] A. R. Hevner, S. T. March, J. Park, and S. Ram, “Design science in information
systems research,”MIS Quarterly, vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 75–105, 2004.
[5] A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N. Gomez,
L. Kaiser, and I. Polosukhin, “Attention is all you need,” Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems , vol. 30, 2017. [Online]. Available:
https://arxiv.org/abs/1706.03762
[6] T. Mikolov, K. Chen, G. Corrado, and J. Dean, “Efficient estimation of word
representations in vector space,” 2013, arXiv:1301.3781. [Online]. Available:
https://arxiv.org/abs/1301.3781
[7] J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, “BERT: Pre-training of deep
bidirectional transformers for language understanding,” inProceedings of the 2019
Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (NAACL-HLT), 2019, pp. 4171–4186.
[Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1810.04805
[8] N. Reimers and I. Gurevych, “Sentence-BERT: Sentence embeddings using siamese
BERT-networks,” inProceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on
Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), 2019, pp. 3982–3992. [Online].
Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1908.10084
[9] Y. A. Malkov and D. A. Yashunin, “Efficient and robust approximate
nearest neighbor search using hierarchical navigable small world graphs,”IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, vol. 42, no. 4, pp.
824–836, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1603.09320
[10] OpenAI. (2024) Embeddings – OpenAI API documentation. [Online]. Available:
https://platform.openai.com/docs/guides/embeddings
[11] J. Chen, S. Xiao, P. Zhang, K. Luo, D. Lian, and Z. Liu. (2024)
BGE M3-embedding: Multi-lingual, multi-functionality, multi-granularity text
embeddings through self-knowledge distillation. ArXiv:2402.03216. [Online].
Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.03216
X
Bibliography Jan Ritt, Imre Obermüller
[12] N. Muennighoff, N. Tazi, L. Magne, and N. Reimers, “MTEB: Massive text
embedding benchmark,” inProceedings of the 17th Conference of the European
Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics (EACL), 2023, pp.
2006–2029. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.07316
[13] P. Lewis, E. Perez, A. Piktus, F. Petroni, V. Karpukhin, N. Goyal, H. Küttler,
M. Lewis, W.-t. Yih, T. Rocktäschel et al., “Retrieval-augmented generation
for knowledge-intensive NLP tasks,”Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, vol. 33, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.11401
[14] A. Conneau and G. Lample, “Cross-lingual language model pretraining,” in
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), vol. 32, 2019.
[Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1901.07291
[15] A. Conneau, K. Khandelwal, N. Goyal, V. Chaudhary, G. Wenzek, F. Guzmán,
E. Grave, M. Ott, L. Zettlemoyer, and V. Stoyanov, “Unsupervised cross-lingual
representation learning at scale,” inProceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL), 2020, pp. 8440–8451. [Online].
Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1911.02116
[16] N. Reimers. (2024) Sentence-transformers documentation. [Online]. Available:
https://www.sbert.net/
[17] JSON-RPC Working Group. (2010) JSON-RPC 2.0 specification. [Online].
Available: https://www.jsonrpc.org/specification
[18] R. T. Fielding, “Architectural styles and the design of network-based software
architectures,” Ph.D. dissertation, University of California, Irvine, 2000. [Online].
Available: https://www.ics.uci.edu/~fielding/pubs/dissertation/top.htm
[19] GraphQL Foundation. (2021) GraphQL specification – october 2021 edition.
[Online]. Available: https://spec.graphql.org/October2021/
[20] OASIS Open,OData Version 4.01 – OASIS Standard, 2022. [Online]. Available:
https://docs.oasis-open.org/odata/odata/v4.01/odata-v4.01-part1-protocol.html
[21] Anthropic. (2024) Introducing the model context protocol. [Online]. Available:
https://www.anthropic.com/news/model-context-protocol
[22] D. Hardt, “The OAuth 2.0 authorization framework,” IETF, RFC 6749, 2012.
[Online]. Available: https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6749
[23] M. Jones and D. Hardt, “The OAuth 2.0 authorization framework:
Bearer token usage,” IETF, RFC 6750, 2012. [Online]. Available: https:
//datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6750
[24] D. Hardt, A. Parecki, and T. Lodderstedt, “The OAuth 2.1 Authorization
Framework (draft-ietf-oauth-v2-1-12),” IETF Internet-Draft, Oct. 2025, work in
progress, accessed 2026-03-20. [Online]. Available: https://datatracker.ietf.org/
doc/draft-ietf-oauth-v2-1/
[25] N. Sakimura, J. Bradley, M. Jones, B. de Medeiros, and C. Mortimore. (2014)
OpenID connect core 1.0. [Online]. Available: https://openid.net/specs/openid-
connect-core-1_0.html
XI
Bibliography Jan Ritt, Imre Obermüller
[26] R. S. Sandhu, E. J. Coyne, H. L. Feinstein, and C. E. Youman, “Role-based
access control models,”IEEE Computer, vol. 29, no. 2, pp. 38–47, 1996. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/2.485845
[27] Red Hat / Keycloak Project. (2024) Keycloak server administration guide
– performance and sizing. Keycloak requires a JVM with at least 512MB
heap; production deployments typically use 1GB or more. [Online]. Available:
https://www.keycloak.org/server/all-config
[28] Caddy Project. (2024) Caddy web server documentation. [Online]. Available:
https://caddyserver.com/docs/
[29] Internet Security Research Group. (2024) Let’s encrypt – free SSL/TLS certificates.
[Online]. Available: https://letsencrypt.org/
[30] Qdrant. (2024) Qdrant documentation. [Online]. Available: https://qdrant.tech/
documentation/
[31] Docker Inc. (2024) Docker compose overview. [Online]. Available: https:
//docs.docker.com/compose/
[32] DokuWiki Community. (2024) DokuWiki XML-RPC API. [Online]. Available:
https://www.dokuwiki.org/devel:xmlrpc
[33] OpenAI.(2024)GPT-4omini–advancingcost-efficientintelligence.Modelsnapshot:
gpt-4o-mini-2024-07-18. [Online]. Available: https://openai.com/index/gpt-4o-
mini-advancing-cost-efficient-intelligence/
[34] J. Cummings. (2025) FastMCP – the fast, pythonic way to build MCP servers.
[Online]. Available: https://github.com/jlowin/FastMCP
[35] Docker Inc. (2024) Docker documentation. [Online]. Available: https:
//docs.docker.com/
[36] S. Ramírez. (2024) FastAPI documentation. [Online]. Available: https:
//fastapi.tiangolo.com/
[37] Python Software Foundation. (2024) asyncio — asynchronous I/O. [Online].
Available: https://docs.python.org/3/library/asyncio.html
[38] S. Colvin. (2024) Pydantic settings management. [Online]. Available: https:
//docs.pydantic.dev/latest/concepts/pydantic-settings/
[39] European Parliament and Council of the European Union. (2016) Regulation
(EU) 2016/679 (general data protection regulation). Official English-language
consolidated text of the GDPR. [Online]. Available: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/eli/
reg/2016/679/oj
[40] Google. (2026) MCP servers with the Gemini CLI. Remote MCP server support
not yet available (GitHub Issue #983). [Online]. Available: https://google-
gemini.github.io/gemini-cli/docs/tools/mcp-server.html
[41] Microsoft. (2025) Model context protocol (MCP) is now gen-
erally available in Microsoft Copilot Studio. [Online]. Available:
https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/microsoft-copilot/blog/copilot-studio/model-
context-protocol-mcp-is-now-generally-available-in-microsoft-copilot-studio/
XII
Bibliography Jan Ritt, Imre Obermüller
[42] GitHub. (2025) GitHub Education – free developer tools for students. [Online].
Available: https://education.github.com/
[43] Cursor Community. (2025) Remote MCP server intermittently shows “error”
status on startup. GitHub Issue #3907: race condition with aggressive timeouts.
[Online]. Available: https://github.com/cursor/cursor/issues/3907
[44] ——. (2025) Remote MCP server “connect” button produces
zero network requests (OAuth flow never starts). [Online]. Avail-
able: https://forum.cursor.com/t/remote-mcp-server-connect-button-produces-
zero-network-requests-oauth-flow-never-starts/150962
[45] J. Wardini. (2026) Google Gemini gains share as ChatGPT declines in
Similarweb data. Similarweb Global AI Tracker, January 2026. [Online].
Available: https://www.searchenginejournal.com/google-gemini-gains-share-as-
chatgpt-declines-in-similarweb-data/564690/
[46] Octen. (2025) Octen-embedding-4b – HuggingFace model card. 4.0B parameters,
2560 dimensions; Apache-2.0 license; fine-tuned from Qwen/Qwen2.5-3B; model by
Octen (https://octen.ai). [Online]. Available: https://huggingface.co/Octen/Octen-
Embedding-4B
[47] TelePIX Co., Ltd. (2026) PIXIE-Rune-v1.0 – HuggingFace model card. 0.568B
parameters, 1024 dimensions; Apache-2.0 license; arXiv:2601.03496. [Online].
Available: https://huggingface.co/telepix/PIXIE-Rune-v1.0
[48] Snowflake. (2025) snowflake-arctic-embed-l-v2.0 – HuggingFace model card.
0.568B parameters, 1024 dimensions; Apache-2.0 license. [Online]. Available:
https://huggingface.co/Snowflake/snowflake-arctic-embed-l-v2.0
[49] Anthropic. (2026) Claude opus 4.6 – model card. Used for ground-truth
question–answer pair generation in the evaluation dataset. [Online]. Available:
https://docs.anthropic.com/en/docs/about-claude/models
[50] K. Järvelin and J. Kekäläinen, “Cumulated gain-based evaluation of IR techniques,”
ACM Transactions on Information Systems, vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 422–446, 2002.
[Online]. Available: https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/582415.582418
[51] LangChain. (2024) Text splitters – LangChain documentation. [Online]. Avail-
able: https://python.langchain.com/docs/modules/data_connection/document_
transformers/
[52] M. Günther, I. Mohr, D. J. Williams, B. Wang, and H. Xiao, “Late
chunking: Contextual chunk embeddings using long-context embedding
models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.04701, 2024. [Online]. Available: https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2409.04701
[53] D. Mozolevskyi and W. AlShikh, “Comparative analysis of retrieval systems
in the real world,”arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.02048, 2024. [Online]. Available:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.02048
[54] G. V. Cormack, C. L. A. Clarke, and S. Buettcher, “Reciprocal rank fusion
outperforms condorcet and individual rank learning methods,” inProceedings
of the 32nd International ACM SIGIR Conference, 2009, pp. 758–759. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/1571941.1572114
XIII
Bibliography Jan Ritt, Imre Obermüller
[55] S. Robertson and H. Zaragoza, “The probabilistic relevance framework: BM25
and beyond,”Foundations and Trends in Information Retrieval, vol. 3, no. 4, pp.
333–389, 2009. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1561/1500000019
[56] DokuWiki Community. (2024) DokuWiki search – fulltext search documentation.
[Online]. Available: https://www.dokuwiki.org/search
[57] Scalekit. (2025) Scalekit – MCP authentication documentation. MCP-
specific authentication flow documentation, updated 2025. [Online]. Available:
https://docs.scalekit.com/
[58] Microsoft. (2024) Openid connect on the microsoft identity platform.
[Online]. Available: https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/entra/identity-platform/v2-
protocols-oidc
[59] Scalekit. (2024) Microsoft entra ID single sign-on integration. [Online]. Available:
https://docs.scalekit.com/integrations/entra-id/
XIV
List of Figures
2.1 From token to sentence embeddings: static (Word2Vec), contextualized
(BERT), and sentence-level (SBERT) paradigms. Sentence embeddings
enable bi-encoder retrieval at scale. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
2.2 RAG pipeline architecture [13]: ingestion (offline), retrieval (at query
time), and generation (handled by the AI client). The LeoWiki system
covers ingestion and retrieval; the client performs generation. . . . . . . 9
2.3 TheN×M integration problem (left) vs. the MCP hub-and-spoke model
(right). MCP eliminates custom adapter code by standardizing the
communication protocol. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
2.4 MCP architecture: client-server session with initialization, tool discovery,
and JSON-RPC 2.0 messaging over stdio or HTTP Streamable transport.14
4.1 LeoWiki MCP system overview. The offline phase (left) prepares the
knowledge base on a development machine: wiki content is fetched,
evaluated, chunked, embedded, and indexed into Qdrant. The resulting
vector database is deployed to the Raspberry Pi 5 (right), where the
runtime phase serves semantic search queries via the MCP protocol to
AI clients. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4.2 Five-stage offline preparation pipeline with concrete parameters. Wiki
content is fetched via XML-RPC (196 pages, 320 media), quality-
evaluated by LLMs, chunked into up to 10,841 segments of 512 tokens
(evaluation corpus), embedded into 3,072-dimensional vectors, and in-
dexed in Qdrant (6,002 vectors, production run with stricter length
filter). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
XV
List of Figures Jan Ritt, Imre Obermüller
4.3 System component architecture. AI clients communicate with the
FastMCP server via the MCP protocol (JSON-RPC 2.0). The server ap-
plies RBAC middleware to validate bearer tokens and enforce role-based
access, then queries the Qdrant vector database using cosine similarity
search. The OpenAI API is used exclusively during offline indexing
(dashed border). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
4.4 Docker Compose container architecture with two isolated networks.
Caddy is the only externally exposed service. The MCP server bridges
both networks; Qdrant and Watchdog are isolated in the backend. . . . 40
5.1 MCP SDK evolution across four development phases. The current
deployment (v2.1) uses FastMCP 3.0 (Phase 4), which adds the most
SDK abstraction among the four phases, including RBAC middleware
and HTTP Streamable transport. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
5.2 MCP transport comparison. stdio is used during development for low-
latency local access; HTTP Streamable is used in production for network
accessibility and multi-client Bearer token authentication. . . . . . . . . 52
5.3 FastMCP middleware pipeline. Each request passes through authenti-
cation, RBAC permission checking, and audit logging before reaching
the tool handler and Qdrant vector database. Error paths (stages 1–4)
short-circuit with standard HTTP error codes. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
5.4 RBAC architecture for the LeoWiki MCP server. Two tool-level access
tiers prevent students from accessing teacher-restricted wiki content. All
requests require a valid JWT Bearer token; the role claim determines
which tools and resources are accessible. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
5.5 OAuth 2.1 redirect to Scalekit login page (identical across all clients). . 68
5.6 One-time code entry during OAuth authentication. . . . . . . . . . . . 69
5.7 Registering the LeoWiki MCP server as a custom connector in Claude
Web App. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 70
5.8 Connector configuration in Claude showing tools, resources, and role-
based permissions. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 70
5.9 Claude Web App executing a search query against the LeoWiki MCP
server. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71
5.10 ChatGPT Desktop after successful OAuth authentication and tool exe-
cution. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71
5.11 Mistral Le Chat showing connector with listed tools (“Functions”). . . 72
XVI
List of Figures Jan Ritt, Imre Obermüller
5.12 Mistral Le Chat executing a search tool call against the LeoWiki MCP
server. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
5.13 MCP client compatibility matrix (February 2026). Three of five tested
AI clients (Claude, ChatGPT, Mistral) fully support remote HTTP
Streamable connections with OAuth 2.1 authentication. Google Gemini
and Microsoft Copilot (consumer chat) lack consumer-facing remote
MCP connector support. Partial entries for resource access and prompt
templates are bridged by FastMCP 3.0 transforms. . . . . . . . . . . . 75
6.1 Aggregated retrieval metrics (MRR, NDCG@10, Hit Rate) of five em-
bedding models on the LeoWiki corpus (78 queries). The dashed line at
0.87 marks the Tier 1 threshold; Tier 1 models are shaded in blue. . . . 82
6.2 Retrieval metrics by question difficulty (easy / medium / hard) for the
five evaluated embedding models. Tier-1 models (Octen-4B, OpenAI)
maintain higher MRR across all difficulty levels. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 84
6.3 Multi-metric comparison of the five embedding models across MRR,
NDCG@10, P@5, Recall@10, and Hit Rate. Tier-1 models (Octen-4B,
OpenAI) occupy more area in all retrieval-quality dimensions. . . . . . 85
6.4 Per-query MRR distribution for each model (78 questions). The wide
boxes reflect the heterogeneous nature of the LeoWiki corpus across
different namespaces and difficulty levels. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 86
6.5 Speed–quality trade-off: embedding throughput (chunks/s) vs. MRR for
the five evaluated models. The Raspberry Pi constraint (no dedicated
GPU) eliminates Octen-4B from production use. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 89
6.6 Chunk size parametric study on the LeoWiki corpus (model: text-
embedding-3-large, 78 queries). MRR, NDCG@10, and Hit Rate are
shown for 256, 512, and 1024 tokens with performance breakdown by
question difficulty. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 93
6.7 Dense vector search vs. hybrid search (BM25 + Reciprocal Rank Fusion)
on 78 ground-truth queries. Metrics shown: MRR, NDCG@10, Hit Rate,
and standard deviation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
6.8 Query miss pattern: queries for which DokuWiki keyword search returns
no relevant result in the top-10. Semantic search resolves the majority of
these failures. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 103
XVII
List of Figures Jan Ritt, Imre Obermüller
6.9 Overall comparison of DokuWiki keyword search vs. semantic RAG
retrieval on 78 ground-truth questions. MRR bars are scaled to the full
[0,1] range across all evaluated retrieval methods. . . . . . . . . . . . . 105
XVIII
List of Tables
2.1 Comparison of embedding paradigms: static, contextualized, and
sentence-level. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
2.2 Architectural comparison: MCP, REST, GraphQL, and OData along
eight dimensions. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
2.3 Mapping of RBAC roles to DokuWiki groups and namespace permissions.19
3.1 Identified use cases for the LeoWiki MCP system. . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3.2 Comparison of identity provider alternatives (as of February 2026). . . 24
3.3 Comparison of integration protocol alternatives (as of February 2026). . 25
3.4 Comparison of vector database alternatives (as of February 2026). . . . 26
3.5 Comparison of embedding model alternatives (as of February 2026). . . 27
3.6 Comparison of reverse proxy alternatives (as of February 2026). . . . . 27
4.1 Data formats between pipeline stages. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
4.2 MCP tool definitions with input parameters and access rules. . . . . . . 37
4.3 External services and their protocols. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
5.1 Breaking changes in the FastMCP 3.0 migration. . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
5.2 Server evolution across four development phases. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
5.3 Transport comparison and recommendations. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
5.4 Search pipeline latency (78 queries× 3 iterations = 234 requests, Rasp-
berry Pi 5). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
5.5 Five-layer middleware pipeline. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
5.6 MCP resources exposed by the LeoWiki MCP server. . . . . . . . . . . 63
5.7 MCP client compatibility matrix (February 2026). . . . . . . . . . . . . 76
6.1 Overview of evaluated embedding models with MTEB rank (RTEB-deu),
parameter count, and vector dimensions. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 80
6.2 Aggregated retrieval metrics of the five evaluated embedding models on
the LeoWiki corpus (78 ground-truth questions, 10,841 chunks, Dense
Cosine Similarity, top_k=10). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 82
XIX
List of Tables Jan Ritt, Imre Obermüller
6.3 Embedding speed and cost per complete indexing of the LeoWiki corpus
(10,841 chunks, NVIDIA RTX 4080 Laptop GPU). . . . . . . . . . . . 84
6.4 Trade-off analysis of the three model categories regarding quality, resource
requirements, and data privacy (research question FF3, operationalized
as sub-question J2). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 87
6.5 Aggregated retrieval metrics by chunk size. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 91
6.6 Retrieval metrics by chunk size and difficulty level. . . . . . . . . . . . 91
6.7 Record schema of the embedding pipeline. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 94
6.8 Metadata fields of the Qdrant payload. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 95
6.9 Metrics of the first production embedding run (Stage 04). . . . . . . . . 96
6.10 Comparison of Dense Search vs. Hybrid Search (78 queries, top_k=10). 98
6.11 Metric differences between dense and hybrid search. . . . . . . . . . . . 98
6.12 Overall comparison of all retrieval methods. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100
6.13 DokuWiki keyword search: full question (78 queries). . . . . . . . . . . 102
6.14 DokuWiki keyword search: optimal keywords (78 queries). . . . . . . . 102
6.15 Overall comparison: DokuWiki keyword search vs. semantic search. . . 103
6.16 RBAC role hierarchy and namespace access. Each role inherits access
from all lower roles. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107
6.17 Docker Compose service architecture for the production deployment. . 110
6.18 Deterministic test coverage summary. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 114
7.1 FF1 summary: Keyword search vs. semantic search on 78 test queries. . 117
7.2 FF2 summary: MCP client compatibility (February 2026). . . . . . . . 119
7.3 FF3 summary: Embedding model comparison on LeoWiki corpus. . . . 119
1 ABA-defined individual contributions per author. . . . . . . . . . . . . XXIV
2 Milestones as defined in the ABA proposal. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XXV
3 Project milestones and actual completion status. . . . . . . . . . . . . . XXV
4 Work distribution between Jan Ritt and Imre Obermüller. . . . . . . . XXVI
5 MCP server error codes. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XXX
6 Required environment variables for the MCP server. . . . . . . . . . . . XXXI
7 Golden query catalog for semantic search evaluation. . . . . . . . . . . XXXIV
8 Golden query results—student role ( search_content_student). . . . . XXXV
9 Golden query results—teacher role ( search_content_teacher). . . . . XXXVI
10 RBAC differences: student vs. teacher search results. . . . . . . . . . . XXXVI
11 Complete retrieval metrics per model (78 ground-truth questions, Dense
Cosine Similarity, top_k=10). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XXXVIII
XX
List of Tables Jan Ritt, Imre Obermüller
12 MRR and Hit Rate broken down by question difficulty. . . . . . . . . . XXXVIII
13 Embedding throughput for the full LeoWiki corpus (10,841 chunks). . . XXXIX
14 Semantic search (text-embedding-3-large) vs. DokuWiki keyword search
on 78 ground-truth questions. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XXXIX
15 J6 — Dense vs. Hybrid Search (10,841 chunks, OpenAI 3-large) . . . . XXXIX
16 LeoWiki corpus statistics at time of evaluation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . XL
17 MCP transport overhead (health_check, 20 iterations per transport,
Raspberry Pi 5). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XLI
XXI
List of Listings
5.1 FastMCP 3.0 server initialization (main.py). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
5.2 Server capabilities returned in theinitialize response (protocol ver-
sion reflects the revision the server was built against; the latest MCP
specification revision is 2025-11-25, see Section 5.10). . . . . . . . . . . 47
5.3 Lifespan-based dependency injection (src/server/lifespan.py). . . . 48
5.4 Transport mode selection (main.py). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
5.5 ASGI app mounting (main.py). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
5.6 Scalekit OAuth 2.1 token validation (scalekit_auth.py). . . . . . . . 54
5.7 Middleware registration (main.py). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
5.8 Multi-fallback role extraction (mcp_middleware.py). . . . . . . . . . . 58
5.9 RBAC tool permissions (mcp_middleware.py). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
5.10 Student search with dynamic oversampling (search_tools.py). . . . . 61
5.11 Resource registration (src/resources/metadata.py). . . . . . . . . . . 63
5.12 Transform registration (main.py). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
5.13 Thread-safe query logging (query_logger.py). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
5.14 Thread-safe singleton pattern (query_logger.py). . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
6.1 Scalekit environment variables in docker-compose.yml. . . . . . . . . . 106
6.2 OAuth Protected Resource metadata generation (simplified). . . . . . . 106
6.3 RBAC role hierarchy for search filtering. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 108
6.4 MCP server Dockerfile (simplified). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110
6.5 FastMCP In-Memory Transport test pattern (simplified). . . . . . . . . 113
1 Tool schema: search_content_student . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XXVII
2 Tool schema: search_content_teacher . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XXVIII
3 Tool schema: get_collection_stats (admin only) . . . . . . . . . . . . . XXVIII
4 Tool schema: get_query_statistics (admin only) . . . . . . . . . . . . . XXIX
5 Tool schema: health_check (all roles) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XXIX
6 Search result structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XXX
7 Production docker-compose.yml (abbreviated) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XXXII
XXII
List of Listings Jan Ritt, Imre Obermüller
8 Caddyfile for reverse proxy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XXXIII
XXIII
Appendix
.1 ABA Proposal
The officialAntrag auf Beurteilung der Arbeit(ABA) was submitted to HTL Leonding
in November 2025 and approved by the supervising instructor, Rainer Stropek. The
proposal defines three research questions:
FF1 (Shared) How effectively can a semantic search based on sentence embeddings
replace keyword-based search in an educational wiki (LeoWiki)?
FF2 (Imre Obermüller)How suitable is the Model Context Protocol (MCP) as an
interface between a specialized search server and heterogeneous AI applications?
FF3 (Jan Ritt)Which sentence embedding model achieves the best retrieval quality
for German-language educational content on resource-limited hardware?
.1.1 Individual Contributions
Table 1: ABA-defined individual contributions per author.
Author Scope
Imre Obermüller (BIF) I1: FastMCP framework selection; I2: JSON-RPC 2.0 processing
and capability negotiation; I3: Transport protocol implementation
(stdio, HTTP Streamable); I4: MCP tool development (5 tools,
RBAC-separated); I5: Client compatibility evaluation (5+ hosts)
Jan Ritt (CIFT) J1: Evaluation setup with ground-truth corpus (78 questions); J2:
Embedding model benchmarking (5 models, MTEB validation); J3:
DokuWiki parsing and chunking pipeline (5 stages); J4: Qdrant
schema design and payload filtering; J5: Retrieval strategy compar-
ison (dense, sparse, hybrid); J6: OAuth2/OIDC integration with
Scalekit; J7: Docker Compose deployment on Raspberry Pi; J8:
Testing (unit, integration, RBAC)
XXIV
.2 Project Plan Jan Ritt, Imre Obermüller
Table 2: Milestones as defined in the ABA proposal.
Milestone Deadline Responsible
MCP vs REST/OData/GraphQL comparison 15 Oct 2025 Shared
Vector DB schema + embedding tests 15 Nov 2025 Jan
MCP server stdio + basic tools 20 Dec 2025 Imre
Semantic search integrated 25 Jan 2026 Shared
HTTP Streamable transport 20 Feb 2026 Imre
OAuth2 integration (Scalekit) 15 Mar 2026 Jan
Docker + npm deployment 30 Mar 2026 Jan
Thesis submission Apr 2026 Shared
.1.2 Milestones from ABA
Note: The labels J1–J8 in Table 1 follow the ABA numbering from November 2025. The
main text (Chapter 6) uses a revised numbering finalized on 2026-02-11; see Section 1.2
for the mapping.
The scanned original ABA form is archived in the thesis repository under
appendix/aba_antrag_scan.pdf.
.2 Project Plan
.2.1 Milestones
Table 3: Project milestones and actual completion status.
Milestone Target Actual Status
Project kickoff Oct 2025 Oct 2025 Completed
ABA submission Nov 2025 Nov 2025 Completed
MCP vs REST/GraphQL research Oct 2025 Oct 2025 Completed
Vector DB schema design Nov 2025 Nov 2025 Completed
MCP stdio prototype Dec 2025 Dec 2025 Completed
Embedding model evaluation Jan 2026 Jan 2026 Completed
Semantic search integration Jan 2026 Jan 2026 Completed
HTTP Streamable transport Feb 2026 Feb 2026 Completed
OAuth2/Scalekit integration Mar 2026 Mar 2026 Completed
Docker deployment (Raspi) Mar 2026 Mar 2026 Completed
Thesis documentation Mar 2026 Mar 2026 Completed
Final review Apr 2026 Mar 2026 Completed
Submission Apr 2026 Apr 2026 Completed
XXV
.3 API Documentation Jan Ritt, Imre Obermüller
.2.2 Work Distribution
Table 4 summarizes the division of labor between the two authors. Shared components
were developed collaboratively using pair-programming sessions and code review.
Table 4: Work distribution between Jan Ritt and Imre Obermüller.
Component Jan Ritt Imre Oberm. Shared
Offline pipeline (5 stages) Primary Review
Embedding evaluation Primary
MCP server core Primary
Transport protocols Primary
MCP tools (5) Primary
OAuth2/Scalekit Primary
RBAC middleware Primary Co-author
Docker/deployment Primary
Qdrant integration Joint
Testing Unit/RBAC MCP/transport
Presentation Joint
Thesis Ch. 1–4, 7 Joint
Thesis Ch. 5 Primary
Thesis Ch. 6 Primary
.2.3 Repository Structure
The project spans multiple Git repositories:
leowiki_mcp_server Production MCP server, Docker configuration, tests, and Cad-
dyfile.
dev_dito Offline pipeline (5 stages), orchestration scripts, and DokuWiki plugin.
dev_dito_modules Reusable Python modules for fetching, parsing, and embedding.
dev_prompts_instructions_notes Thesis document source (LATEX), research notes,
prompts archive, and diagram sources.
.3 API Documentation
.3.1 MCP Tool Schemas
The LeoWiki MCP server exposes five tools via JSON-RPC 2.0.
XXVI
.3 API Documentation Jan Ritt, Imre Obermüller
search_content_student
1 {
2 "name": "search_content_student",
3 "description": "Search LeoWiki content accessible to students",
4 "inputSchema": {
5 "type": "object",
6 "properties": {
7 "query": {
8 "type": "string",
9 "description": "Natural language search query"
10 },
11 "limit": {
12 "type": "integer",
13 "default": 5,
14 "minimum": 1,
15 "maximum": 20,
16 "description": "Maximum number of results"
17 }
18 },
19 "required": ["query"]
20 }
21 }
Listing 1:Tool schema: search_content_student
XXVII
.3 API Documentation Jan Ritt, Imre Obermüller
search_content_teacher
1 {
2 "name": "search_content_teacher",
3 "description": "Search LeoWiki with teacher-level access",
4 "inputSchema": {
5 "type": "object",
6 "properties": {
7 "query": {
8 "type": "string",
9 "description": "Natural language search query"
10 },
11 "limit": {
12 "type": "integer",
13 "default": 10,
14 "maximum": 50
15 },
16 "namespace": {
17 "type": "string",
18 "description": "Restrict to a DokuWiki namespace"
19 }
20 },
21 "required": ["query"]
22 }
23 }
Listing 2:Tool schema: search_content_teacher
get_collection_stats
1 {
2 "name": "get_collection_stats",
3 "description": "Retrieve Qdrant collection statistics",
4 "inputSchema": {
5 "type": "object",
6 "properties": {}
7 }
8 }
Listing 3:Tool schema: get_collection_stats (admin only)
XXVIII
.3 API Documentation Jan Ritt, Imre Obermüller
get_query_statistics
1 {
2 "name": "get_query_statistics",
3 "description": "Retrieve aggregated query log statistics",
4 "inputSchema": {
5 "type": "object",
6 "properties": {}
7 }
8 }
Listing 4:Tool schema: get_query_statistics (admin only)
health_check
1 {
2 "name": "health_check",
3 "description": "Check server and database connectivity",
4 "inputSchema": {
5 "type": "object",
6 "properties": {}
7 }
8 }
Listing 5:Tool schema: health_check (all roles)
.3.2 Response Format
Search tools return results as an array ofSearchResult objects:
XXIX
.4 Configuration Reference Jan Ritt, Imre Obermüller
1 {
2 "results": [
3 {
4 "title": "Page title",
5 "namespace": "departm:it",
6 "content": "Matching chunk text (truncated)...",
7 "score": 0.8734,
8 "metadata": {
9 "page_id": "departm:it:courses:sew",
10 "chunk_index": 3,
11 "total_chunks": 12,
12 "last_modified": "2025-11-20"
13 }
14 }
15 ],
16 "query": "original query text",
17 "total_results": 5,
18 "search_time_ms": 42
19 }
Listing 6:Search result structure
.3.3 Error Codes
The server uses standard JSON-RPC 2.0 error codes plus application-specific exten-
sions:
Table 5: MCP server error codes.
Code Meaning Context
−32700 Parse error Malformed JSON-RPC request
−32600 Invalid request Missing required fields
−32601 Method not found Unknown tool name
−32602 Invalid params Schema validation failure
−32603 Internal error Qdrant connection failure
−32001 Unauthorized Missing or invalid JWT
−32003 Forbidden RBAC role insufficient
−32010 Rate limited Query rate limit exceeded
XXX
.4 Configuration Reference Jan Ritt, Imre Obermüller
Table 6: Required environment variables for the MCP server.
Variable Description Example / Default
VECTOR_DB_URL Qdrant HTTP endpoint http://qdrant:6333
DEFAULT_COLLECTION Qdrant collection name educational_content
HTTP_HOST Server bind address 0.0.0.0
HTTP_PORT Server port 8000
LOG_LEVEL Logging verbosity INFO
ENABLE_RBAC Enable role checking true
DEFAULT_USER_ROLE Fallback if no JWT student
ENABLE_AUTH Enable OAuth2 flow false
SCALEKIT_ENV_URL Scalekit environment URL https://...
SCALEKIT_CLIENT_ID OAuth2 client ID (secret)
SCALEKIT_CLIENT_SECRET OAuth2 client secret (secret)
OPENAI_API_KEY OpenAI API key for embed-
dings
(secret)
EMBEDDING_MODEL Model identifier text-embedding-3-large
.4 Configuration Reference
.4.1 Environment Variables
.4.2 Docker Compose Configuration
The production docker-compose.yml defines four services across two isolated net-
works. Listing 7 shows the full configuration deployed on the Raspberry Pi at
https://leowiki-mcp.stream.
XXXI
.4 Configuration Reference Jan Ritt, Imre Obermüller
1 services:
2 qdrant:
3 image: qdrant/qdrant:v1.14.1
4 container_name: mcp-qdrant
5 restart: unless-stopped
6 ports:
7 - "127.0.0.1:6333:6333"
8 expose:
9 - "6334"
10 volumes:
11 - qdrant_data:/qdrant/storage
12 networks:
13 - backend-network
14
15 mcp-server:
16 build: .
17 container_name: mcp-server
18 restart: unless-stopped
19 expose:
20 - "8000"
21 depends_on:
22 qdrant:
23 condition: service_started
24 environment:
25 - VECTOR_DB_URL=http://qdrant:6333
26 - ENABLE_RBAC=true
27 - EMBEDDING_MODEL=text-embedding-3-large
28 networks:
29 - frontend-network
30 - backend-network
31
32 watchdog:
33 build:
34 context: .
35 dockerfile: Dockerfile.watchdog
36 container_name: mcp-watchdog
37 restart: unless-stopped
38 environment:
39 - CLEAR_COLLECTION_BEFORE_INGEST=true
40 networks:
41 - backend-network
42
43 caddy:
44 image: caddy:2.9.1-alpine
45 container_name: mcp-caddy
46 restart: unless-stopped
47 ports:
48 - "80:80"
49 - "443:443"
50 - "443:443/udp"
51 networks:
52 - frontend-network
53
54 networks:
55 frontend-network:
56 driver: bridge
57 backend-network:
58 driver: bridge
59
60 volumes:
61 qdrant_data:
62 caddy_data:
63 caddy_config:
Listing 7:Production docker-compose.yml (abbreviated)
XXXII
.5 Test Protocols Jan Ritt, Imre Obermüller
.4.3 Caddyfile
Caddy is configured to automatically obtain Let’s Encrypt TLS certificates and proxy
all traffic to the MCP server:
1 leowiki-mcp.stream {
2 reverse_proxy mcp-server:8000 {
3 flush_interval -1
4 }
5 header {
6 Strict-Transport-Security "max-age=31536000; includeSubDomains"
7 X-Content-Type-Options "nosniff"
8 X-Frame-Options "DENY"
9 }
10 }
Listing 8:Caddyfile for reverse proxy
.5 Test Protocols
.5.1 Golden Query Catalog
The golden query catalog contains curated test queries derived from real LeoWiki
content. Each query has associatedgold_contains keywords that the expected result
must include. Table 7 lists the eight golden queries used to evaluate search quality,
relevance, and RBAC filtering.
Expected keywords per query. Each golden query defines a set of keywords that
must appear in a relevant result:
• GQ01: Diplomarbeit, Format, Word
• GQ02: Matura, Klausur, Einlass
• GQ03: Office365, Mail, Account
• GQ04: Exkursion, organisieren, Leitfaden, Genehmigung
• GQ05: Exkursion, Antrag, Formular, Download
• GQ06: Diplomarbeit, Thema, Betreuung, Koordinator
• GQ07: Company Thesis Day, Diplomarbeit, Firmen
• GQ08: Diplomarbeit, Präsentation, Dresscode, Kleidung
Query categories.
XXXIII
.5 Test Protocols Jan Ritt, Imre Obermüller
Table 7: Golden query catalog for semantic search evaluation.
ID Name Query (German) Type
GQ01 DA Format (Word?) Darf ich meine Diplomarbeit mit MS
Word schreiben?
Policy
GQ02 Matura Klausurtag Wann ist Einlass am Klausurtag der
Matura?
Factual
GQ03 Office365 Mail Ab wann gibt es die neuen Office365
Mail Accounts?
Factual
GQ04 Exkursion organisieren Was ist zu beachten, wenn ich eine
Exkursion organisiere?
Procedural
GQ05 Exkursion Antrag Wo finde ich das Antragsformular für
Exkursionen?
Navigation
GQ06 DA kein Thema Was ist wenn ich kein Thema für eine
Diplomarbeit finde?
Advisory
GQ07 Company Thesis Day Was ist der Company Thesis Day? Conceptual
GQ08 Dresscode Präsentation Wie lautet der Dresscode für Diplo-
marbeitspräsentationen?
Policy
• Policy (GQ01, GQ08):Expect references to school rules or regulations.
• Factual (GQ02, GQ03):Expect specific dates, times, or system information.
• Procedural (GQ04): Expect step-by-step instructions or checklists.
• Navigation (GQ05):Expect links or locations of downloadable resources.
• Advisory (GQ06):Expect guidance for students in specific situations.
• Conceptual (GQ07): Expect explanatory content about school events.
All queries are in German, matching the primary language of LeoWiki content.
This tests the server’s ability to handle German-language semantic search with the
text-embedding-3-large model. The golden query evaluation serves as a qualitative
verification of the deployed production system. The primary quantitative evalua-
tion, based on 78 ground-truth questions with automated scoring, is documented in
Appendix .6.
.5.2 Test Execution Log
Execution metadata.
• Date: 2026-02-20
• Server: LeoWiki Remote MCP v2.1 athttps://leowiki-mcp.stream/mcp
• Configuration: limit=10, embedding modeltext-embedding-3-large (3072D)
XXXIV
.5 Test Protocols Jan Ritt, Imre Obermüller
• Environment: Docker Compose (Caddy + MCP Server + Qdrant), Raspberry Pi
• Collection: educational_content (3,417 documents at test time). The produc-
tion collection underwent three stages: (1) 3,417 vectors on 2026-02-20 (this test),
(2) 6,002 vectors after a full re-ingestion on 2026-02-26 (cf. Table 6.9), (3) 6,082 vec-
tors by 2026-03-21 after an incremental update adding 80 newly published pages (cf.
Section 5.3.4). The 10,841-chunk evaluation corpus uses a different configuration;
see Section 6.3.4 for the pipeline parameter differences
• Client: Claude Web App (Pro Plan). Queries were sent verbatim to the MCP
server without LLM reformulation
Student Role Results (search_content_student)
Table 8 shows the results when querying with the student role.
Table 8: Golden query results—student role (search_content_student).
QID Short Name Top Result Source Rel.
GQ01 DA Format Word-Vorlage mit Formatvorlagen (diplomar-
beit_vorlage_deckblatt.docx)
4
GQ02 Matura Klausurtag Einlass: 7:45–8:00 Uhr(exams:matura-am) 5
GQ03 Office365 Mail Studentmailmigration: ab 10.Sep.2023 (spe-
cial:studentmailmigration)
5
GQ04 Exkursion org. Antrag auf Exkursion / Wandertag / Lehrausgang
(org:forms:exkursion)
4
GQ05 Exkursion Antrag Antrag auf Exkursion / Wandertag / Lehrausgang
(org:forms:exkursion)
5
GQ06 DA kein Thema DA-Inf-IT: Abstimmung mit AV; Kolleg:innen be-
sprechen (exams:da-inf-it)
4
GQ07 Company Thesis Day Company Thesis Day:6 Firmen, 3-Min-Slots
(exams:da-inf-it)
5
GQ08 Dresscode Kleidungsvorschrift: festlich(exams:da-inf-it) 5
Teacher Role Results (search_content_teacher)
Table 9 shows the teacher role results. Entries marked with⋆ indicate results exclusive
to the teacher role from theteacher: namespace.
Relevance scale.
• 5: Perfect match—all gold keywords present, directly answers the query.
• 4: Highly relevant—most gold keywords present, answers the query well.
XXXV
.5 Test Protocols Jan Ritt, Imre Obermüller
Table 9: Golden query results—teacher role (search_content_teacher).
QID Short Name Top Result Source Rel.
GQ01 DA Format (identical to student) 4
GQ02 Matura Klausurtag (identical to student) 5
GQ03 Office365 Mail Result #5 ⋆: teacher:it:teachermailaccounts
(Lehrer-Webmail)
5
GQ04 Exkursion org. Result #1 ⋆: teacher:neulehrerinnenhandbuch
(Frau Aslan, SGA)
5
GQ05 Exkursion Antrag Result #2⋆: teacher:neulehrerinnenhandbuch; #5
⋆: teacher:forms:stundentausch
5
GQ06 DA kein Thema (identical to student) 4
GQ07 Company Thesis Day (identical to student) 5
GQ08 Dresscode (identical to student) 5
• 3: Partially relevant—some gold keywords, related but incomplete answer.
• 2: Marginally relevant—few keywords, only loosely related.
• 1: Not relevant—no gold keywords, does not answer the query.
.5.3 RBAC Verification
Table 10 summarizes the role-based differences observed across all eight golden queries
when comparingsearch_content_student and search_content_teacher.
Table 10: RBAC differences: student vs. teacher search results.
QID Diff? Teacher-Exclusive Content
GQ01 No Identical results
GQ02 No Identical results
GQ03 Yes teacher:it:teachermailaccounts (Lehrer-Webmail, bildung.gv.at)
GQ04 Yes teacher:neulehrerinnenhandbuch:teaching (Frau Aslan, SGA);
teacher:forms:eintaegigeveranstaltung (SchVV §2)
GQ05 Yes teacher:neulehrerinnenhandbuch:teaching;
teacher:forms:stundentausch
GQ06 No Identical results
GQ07 No Identical results
GQ08 No Identical results
Analysis. Three of eight queries (GQ03, GQ04, GQ05) produce different results
depending on the user role. In all three cases, the teacher role returns additional content
from theteacher: namespace that is not visible to students. This confirms that the
XXXVI
.6 Benchmark Data Jan Ritt, Imre Obermüller
RBAC filtering system correctly restricts namespace access based on JWT role claims.
The five queries with identical results concern content in shared namespaces (exams:,
org:forms:, it:) that are accessible to both roles.
.5.4 MCP Server Test Results
The automated test suite intests/ comprises 22 test files with approximately 100 top-
level test_* functions (pytest collects additional cases from parametrized tests). Deter-
ministic tests (no external dependencies) form the CI gate and verify tool registration,
RBAC permission matrices, middleware chain ordering, and configuration loading. Inte-
gration tests verify the full request lifecycle including HTTP endpoints, MCP protocol
negotiation, and query logging.
.5.5 Security Verification
RBAC bypass. The golden query comparison (Table 10) confirms thatteacher:
namespace content is not returned to student-role users. This is enforced by the
RBACEnforcementMiddleware which intercepts tool calls before execution and applies
namespace-based post-filtering on results.
Rate limiting. The slowapi library enforces per-IP rate limits (default: 100 request-
s/minute). Exceeding the limit returns HTTP 429 with aRetry-After header.
Error masking. Search tool errors return a generic German message ("Es ist ein
Fehler bei der Suche aufgetreten.") rather than exposing internal implementa-
tion details such as Qdrant connection strings or stack traces.
.6 Benchmark Data
This appendix provides the complete benchmark data referenced in Chapter 6. All
measurements were performed on 2026-02-17 on the following hardware and software
stack:
• Hardware: NVIDIA RTX 4080 Laptop GPU (12 GB VRAM), AMD Ryzen 9,
32 GB RAM.
XXXVII
.6 Benchmark Data Jan Ritt, Imre Obermüller
• Software: Python 3.11 (evaluation stack; the MCP server uses Python 3.13,
see Section 6.8.5), sentence-transformers 3.3, tiktoken 0.5, qdrant-client 1.12,
Qdrant v1.14.1.
• Tokenizer: Token counts reported by the OpenAI API
(response.usage.total_tokens); chunk-level token counting usestiktoken.
The LeoWiki corpus contained 10,841 chunks derived from 196 wiki pages and 320 media
files.
.6.1 Embedding Model Evaluation – Full Results
Table 11: Complete retrieval metrics per model (78 ground-truth questions, Dense
Cosine Similarity, top_k=10).
Model MRR NDCG@10 P@5 a Recall@10b Hit Rateb
Octen-Embedding-4B 0.883 0.899 0.185 0.949 94.9%
text-embedding-3-large 0.872 0.897 0.192 0.974 97.4%
PIXIE-Rune-v1.0 0.802 0.823 0.177 0.885 88.5%
snowflake-arctic-embed-l-v2.0 0.788 0.822 0.182 0.923 92.3%
bge-m3-unsupervised 0.756 0.800 0.182 0.936 93.6%
aPrecision measured atk = 5. Because the evaluation operates at chunk granularity, multiple chunks
from the same or overlapping pages may be scored as relevant by the multi-signal scoring function (see
Section 6.2), which explains why P@5 exceeds 0.100.
bEach ground-truth question targets one wiki page. Recall@k and Hit Rate are equivalent at
document level (one relevant page per query); both metrics are shown for comparability with MTEB
reporting conventions.
.6.2 Results by Difficulty Level
Table 12: MRR and Hit Rate broken down by question difficulty.
Easy (n=17) Medium (n=40) Hard (n=21)
Model MRR Hit% MRR Hit% MRR Hit%
Octen-4B 0.840 100.0 0.916 95.0 0.857 90.5
OpenAI-3-large 0.873 94.1 0.856 97.5 0.900 100.0
PIXIE-Rune 0.765 88.2 0.820 90.0 0.810 85.7
Snowflake 0.752 88.2 0.805 92.5 0.795 95.2
bge-m3 0.718 88.2 0.774 95.0 0.761 95.2
XXXVIII
.6 Benchmark Data Jan Ritt, Imre Obermüller
.6.3 Embedding Speed Comparison
Table 13 reports the embedding throughput for the five models measured on the full
10,841-chunk evaluation corpus. All local models were run on the NVIDIA RTX 4080
Laptop GPU (12 GB VRAM); the OpenAI model was accessed via API.
Table 13: Embedding throughput for the full LeoWiki corpus (10,841 chunks).
Model Params Dim Time (s) Chunks/s
bge-m3-unsupervised 568M 1024 104.6 104
PIXIE-Rune-v1.0 568M 1024 107.3 101
snowflake-arctic-embed-l-v2.0 568M 1024 109.4 99
text-embedding-3-large API 3072 179.1 61
Octen-Embedding-4B 4.0B 2560 2186.3 5
.6.4 Search Quality – Semantic vs. Keyword
Table 14: Semantic search (text-embedding-3-large) vs. DokuWiki keyword search on
78 ground-truth questions.
Method MRR Hit Rate Avg. Rank
Semantic (OpenAI, cosine) 0.872 97.4% 1.23
Keyword (DokuWiki ft_idx) 0.051 5.1% —
Keyword (LLM-extracted)† 0.365 37.2% —
†Keywords were extracted from each question by Claude 3.5 Sonnet (Anthropic snapshot 2024-10-22,
accessed 2026-02-17) before querying the DokuWiki full-text index; see CSV rowFF1_keyword_llm
for raw values.
The semantic search achieves a 92.3 percentage-point improvement in hit rate over
the native DokuWiki full-text index search. The average rank of the correct result in
semantic search is 1.23, meaning the relevant document appears within the top ten
results in 76 of 78 queries (97.4%).
.6.5 Dense vs. Hybrid Search – Experiment J6
Table 15: J6 — Dense vs. Hybrid Search (10,841 chunks, OpenAI 3-large)
Mode MRR σ NDCG@10 P@5 Hit Rate
Dense 0.8733 0.279 0.8983 0.1923 97.4%
Hybrid (BM25 + RRF) 0.8108 0.309 0.8487 0.1897 96.2%
XXXIX
.6 Benchmark Data Jan Ritt, Imre Obermüller
The experiment used the OpenAItext-embedding-3-large model with 10,841 chunks
from the full LeoWiki corpus. Hybrid search combines BM25 keyword matching with
vector similarity via Reciprocal Rank Fusion (RRF). Dense retrieval outperforms hybrid
on this corpus: the 6.25-percentage-point MRR drop suggests that BM25 noise offsets
its potential gains for the predominantly German technical-documentation queries used
here.
.6.6 Evaluation Corpus Characteristics
Table 16: LeoWiki corpus statistics at time of evaluation.
Metric Value
Total wiki pages 196
Total media files 320
Chunks after processing 10,841
Unique namespaces 23
Ground-truth questions 78
Question categories Easy / Medium / Hard
Avg. chunk length 287 tokens (counted with tiktoken)
.6.7 MCP Server Latency
The latency benchmarks in this subsection were performed on 2026-03-21 on the
production hardware and software stack:
• Hardware: Raspberry Pi 5 (8GB RAM, ARM64).
• Software: FastMCP 3.0.1, Qdrant v1.14.1 (Docker), Caddy v2.9.1 (TLS termi-
nation), Python 3.13.
• Embedding API:OpenAI text-embedding-3-large (3072 dimensions).
Transport overhead. The following experiment compares the protocol overhead of the
two MCP transports. Thehealth_check tool (minimal payload) was used to isolate
transport latency from search logic. Each transport was measured over 20 iterations
after one warm-up request, timed withtime.perf_counter().
Table 17 summarizes the measured timings. The∼95ms difference is attributable to
TLS handshake (∼30–50ms), network round-trip via Tailscale VPN (∼50–80ms), and
Caddy reverse proxy processing (∼5–10ms).
XL
.7 AI-Generated Content Disclosure Jan Ritt, Imre Obermüller
Table 17: MCP transport overhead (health_check, 20 iterations per transport,
Raspberry Pi 5).
Transport Mean (ms) Median (ms) σ (ms) Min (ms) Max (ms) Ratio
stdio 17.9 17.9 0.2 17.7 18.5 1.0 ×
HTTP Streamable 113.1 109.9 8.0 108.6 142.9 6.3 ×
Search pipeline latency. A separate benchmark measured the core search pipeline
without MCP protocol overhead, using 78 ground-truth Q&A pairs over three iterations
(234 requests total). The full breakdown is reported in Table 5.4 (Section 5.3.4).
Embedding generation via the OpenAI API dominates at 87% of total latency (mean
181.8ms); the Qdrant HNSW vector search over 6082 documents5 accounts for the
remaining 13% (mean 26.1ms). Combined with transport overhead, estimated end-
to-end latency is∼226ms via stdio and∼321ms via HTTP—both within the NFR-1
target of 2s.
.7 AI-Generated Content Disclosure
In accordance with HTL Leonding thesis requirements, this appendix documents the use
of AI tools during the creation of this thesis. Complete prompt histories are available
in the.prompts/ directory of the thesis repository:
https://github.com/IxI-Enki/DA_2026_thesis_docs
.7.1 AI Was Used For
• Draft generation from structured notes (all chapters), followed by full author
review and rewriting
• Translation assistance (German↔ English)
• LATEX formatting and diagram code generation
• Code boilerplate and debugging support for the pipeline and MCP server
5The production embedding run (2026-02-26) produced 6,002 vectors. The collection had grown to
6,082 points by the benchmark date (2026-03-21) due to an incremental re-ingestion run that added
80 newly published wiki pages.
XLI
.7 AI-Generated Content Disclosure Jan Ritt, Imre Obermüller
• Generation of 95 candidate Q&A pairs (Claude Opus 4.6, accessed 2026-02-17), of
which 78 were retained after manual verification by both authors (see Section 6.1
for the verification procedure and rejection criteria)
.7.2 AI Was Not Used For
• Research methodology and evaluation design
• Benchmark measurements or result interpretation
• Technology selection decisions (MCP, Qdrant, Scalekit, embedding models)
• Source verification – all technical claims were checked against primary sources
(documentation, RFCs, published papers)
.7.3 Writing and Translation Process
The thesis was drafted in English with the assistance of AI-based language tools for
grammar checking and stylistic refinement. As native German speakers, the authors
used translation assistance for technical writing in English. All technical content,
experimental design, methodology, and conclusions represent the authors’ own work.
Specific AI tools used for writing assistance are listed in the preceding section.
All benchmark data was produced by the authors’ own evaluation scripts. No measure-
ment results were generated or modified by AI tools.
XLII
